---
title: "33743630"
url: https://newyorker.com/magazine/2023/10/09/they-studied-dishonesty-was-their-work-a-lie/
author: Gideon Lewis-Kraus
date: 2023-12-10
time: 11:22 AM
source: "reader"
aliases:
  - They Studied Dishonesty. Was Their Work a Lie?
---
## Highlights
> Nelson, who teaches at U.C. Berkeley, said. Researchers could measure dozens of variables and perform reams of analyses, then publish only the correlations that happened to appear “significant.” If you tortured the data long enough, as one grim joke went, it would confess to anything. They called such techniques “p-hacking.” As they later put it, “Everyone knew it was wrong, but they thought it was wrong the way it’s wrong to jaywalk.” In fact, they wrote, “it was wrong the way it’s wrong to rob a bank.” ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01he4tpa195w6ph1jywhd6qw9a))

> One of the confounding things about the social sciences is that observational evidence can produce only correlations. To what extent is dishonesty a matter of character, and to what extent a matter of situation? Research misconduct is sometimes explained away by incentives—the publishing requirements for the job market, or the acclaim that can lead to consulting fees and Davos appearances. As one senior faculty member told me, of bridging the academic and corporate worlds, “You see what the money can buy you, you fly business class on work trips. It tickles you in that little place, and you need to have more of it.” The difference between p-hacking and fraud is one of degree. And once it becomes customary within a field to inflate results, the field selects for researchers inclined to do so. ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01he4vx88s56ajctcqze49b73c))