---
title: "The Internet Con: How to Seize the Means of Computation"
url:
author: Cory Doctorow
date: 2023-12-10
time: 11:22 AM
source: "koreader"
aliases:
  - "The Internet Con: How to Seize the Means of Computation"
---
## Highlights
> Technology isn’t the problem. Stop thinking about what technology does and start thinking about who technology does it to and who it does it for.

> But network effects are merely how Big Tech gets big. Switching costs are how Big Tech stays big.

> When switching costs are high enough, people will keep using products and services even though they hate those products and services. So long as the pain of staying is less than the pain of leaving, users stay.

> The corollary: the lower the switching costs are, the better a company has to treat you if they want to keep your business.

> Interoperability lowers switching costs. Interoperability allows us, the users of technology, to set the terms on which we use that technology. It allows us to use the parts of products and services that benefit us, and block the parts that don’t.

> The idea that tech itself can’t be racist because computers are just doing math, and math can’t be racist? Utter exceptionalism.

> In arguing for his bill, Sherman said to the Senate: “If we will not endure a King as a political power we should not endure a King over the production, transportation, and sale of the necessaries of life. If we would not submit to an emperor we should not submit to an autocrat of trade with power to prevent competition and to fix the price of any commodity.”

> But “consumer” is only one of our aspects in society. We are also “workers,” “parents,” “residents” and, not least, “citizens.” If our cheaper products come at the expense of our living wage, or the viability of our neighborhoods, or the democratically accountable authority of our elected representatives, have we really come out ahead?

> But all of this comes at a price: the rise of “autocrats of trade”: unelected princelings whose unaccountable whims dictate how we live, work, learn and play. Apple’s moderators decide which apps you can use, and if they decline to list an educational game about sweatshop labor or an app that notifies you when a US drone kills a civilian overseas, well, that’s that.

> Microsoft, Airbnb, Uber, LinkedIn … the largest tech firms structure our lives in myriad ways, without regard to our well-being, without fear of competition and largely without regulation (for now).

> They’re different for two reasons: first, because they control the means of computation. These companies rule our digital world, the place where we find one another, form communities and mobilize in solidarity to take collective action.

> This is what “software is eating the world” really means: the positive externalities of computer improvements set up a virtuous cycle where improvements begat partisans for still more improvements, which created still more partisans.

> Tech is the terrain on which our future fights will be fought. If we can’t seize the means of computation, we will lose the fight before it is even joined.

> rather, they’re dedicated to ensuring that leaving Facebook behind is so punishing and unpleasant that people stay, even if they hate Facebook.

> Digital technology was sold to us as an infinitely customizable, responsive, idiosyncratic new way of living. Networked tools were supposed to give us more control over our lives. Instead, we find ourselves manipulated, controlled, corralled and milked dry.

> Without the right to quote—and thus critique—the news, we’re at the mercy of fallible reporters and their fallible editors.

> Every time we deputize tech companies with government-like enforcement duties, we make it that much harder to cut them down to size (because they need to be big to fulfill those duties) and that much harder for smaller tech to offer better, more user-centric services (because small tech companies, startups, co-ops, nonprofits and individual tinkerers can’t afford to comply with the regulations that force them to police their users’ conduct).

> The real problem is that job should not exist. No one should hold that much power. We don’t need a better Zuck. We need to abolish Zuck.

> We have to pick one: either we cut tech companies down to size, or we hold them accountable for their users’ actions.

> Beyond cooperative interoperability, there is also indifferent interoperability. That’s when someone makes a new product that plugs into an existing one that was not designed with the new product in mind, but which was also not designed to prevent this from happening.

> Those who would defeat these locks have the “attacker’s advantage.” For a system like a VIN lock to work, its authors must write code with no errors. For the system to be defeated, their adversaries need only find a single error and exploit it. Defenders need to be perfect, while attackers do not.

> Worse: even if the big company’s engineers manage to repel the invaders, that does nothing to stop the next wave of would-be interoperators from challenging them anew.

> In other words, a legal victory is far more devastating than a mere technical one.

> Venture capitalists call the products and services adjacent to the Big Tech firms’ core technology “the kill zone” and will not invest in any company that proposes to pitch its tent in that dead place.

> The aerospace engineers who sat down to design those solid rocket boosters had a lot of parameters to juggle—the pull of gravity, the efficiency of rocket fuel, the weight of the payload. But mixed in with those parameters, immutable and inarguable was the width of a railcar, which was foreordained by the width of the Roman chariot wheelbase, which was, in turn, determined by the metalbeating know-how of Roman blacksmiths.

> Infrastructure casts a long shadow.

> How can we tell when Facebook shuts down a competitor out of an abundance of well-founded caution, and when Facebook shuts down that competitor in order to make it less useful and thus less attractive to Facebook users who had been contemplating a disloyal defection from Facebook to a new company?

> It’s hard enough to even understand the underlying technical questions, but when the arguments themselves are long, tedious, technical and highly abstract, you can get away with nearly anything.

> copyright or a patent is, fundamentally, a license to sue others who duplicate your products. That license is dangled before inventors and creators, as a carrot to tempt them to set aside their other pressing needs and devote themselves to invention and creation

> Economists call this a “collective action problem” and it’s a specific kind of switching cost: to switch away from Facebook you must either figure out how to convince everyone you talk to on Facebook to switch with you (a high cost) or forfeit your relationship with them (also a high cost).

> The problem isn’t merely that Facebook and other large systems underinvest in moderation and are indifferent to the harms experienced by the users of their services—it’s also that no amount of investment and no amount of caring would actually solve the problem of dedicated trolls, griefers and harassers. Moderate a lot or a little, be specific or general, it doesn’t matter—the trolls will win.

> ’m not saying that communities that moderate themselves will always get it right. I’m saying that communities moderated by distant, unaccountable moderators will never get it right—and that communities that moderate themselves have a chance of getting it right

> All of these companies make the same claims as Sega: we’re not locking you in, we’re locking the bad guys out. The 30 percent take we cream off of every purchase you make isn’t rent-seeking—it’s cost-recovery, a modest commission that lets us pay our expert curators to ensure that the apps in our app store are high-quality, safe and secure.

> The protection they extend is purely selfish: they protect us to the extent that doing so helps them maximize the revenues they earn from us.

> But it’s an objection that should be framed as a question, not a statement: instead of stating “regulators are too clueless to regulate tech,” we should be asking “why are regulators so clueless when it comes to regulating tech?”

> Regulators can’t regulate tech because they’re clueless, sure. But why are they clueless? Because the process by which regulators and lawmakers understand issues starts from the presumption that there will be an adversarial process and a neutral referee, and monopolies turn that into a chummy backroom deal between a handful of executives from the industry and a handful of their former colleagues who are temporarily regulating their former colleagues.

> It shows how expert, empirical findings feed into political choices, and it shows how monopolies can mobilize their profits, converting them into political power and using that to block good policymaking in favor of policies that help their shareholders and hurt the public.

> Feudal security fails badly. If a company decides to betray your trust and invade your privacy, the security experts won’t defend you from their own employers—instead, they’ll turn on interoperators who step in to defend you.

> Companies can defend our privacy, and they often do, but when they choose not to—because they value something else more highly, or because they change corporate strategy—then you have no recourse but to leave. And where companies have used lock-in strategies to punish you for leaving, you might choose to give up your privacy rather than endure the switching costs they’ve engineered into the system.

> When a platform corrals everyone important to you, you’re going to stay on that platform, even if the platform is badly run.

> Tech monopolies are epiphenomena: they are effects, not causes. They are the effect of an ideology that embraces monopolies and inequality as a natural, even inevitable phenomenon. It’s an ideology that lionizes monopolists as once-in-a-generation geniuses who deserve the power to structure the daily routines and constraints of billions of their fellow humans.

^2fad4f

> But these companies aren’t courts, they don’t have anything like a due process system—and yet, they can dole out penalties that go beyond anything that a court would impose. Even if a judge sends you to prison, the state won’t incinerate all your family photos, all your correspondence and every personal file you have. It won’t cut you off from every other account you have.

^522fca

> the 600-plus years since, Nihil novi nisi commune consensu has given way to a catchier slogan: “Nothing about us without us.” The modern term began in the disability rights community, where it meant that decisions about how to accommodate disabilities should involve people with disabilities. The slogan was also taken up by Indigenous activists, who used it in opposition to a half-millennium’s worth of paternalistic—and genocidal—policies that treated First Nations people as children at best and livestock at worst.

> Western tech design teams are typically composed of well-off people with fancy degrees from excellent technical universities. There are a smattering of people from the Global South who win scholarships to those schools, get work visas, land jobs at tech giants and find their way onto product design teams, but they are a minority of a minority.

> Technology design choices are made in high-income nations with stable governments, at least the pretense of the rule of law, and reliable electricity and internet access, and then they’re shipped to the Global South where those design decisions utterly fail.

> The Global South labors under a dual imposition: they are coerced into passing tech laws that are friendly to US corporations, and then those same corporations make unilateral product design decisions that do not account for local circumstances and, thanks to those laws, can’t be modified by their Global South users.

^a5e43f