---
title: "35238389"
url: https://www.florianbellmann.com/blog/never-taught-qa
author: Florian Bellmann
date: 2023-12-10
time: 11:22 AM
source: "reader"
aliases:
  - You Are Never Taught How to Build Quality Software
---
## Highlights
> I have seen it countless times. QA standards and measures are the ones to be cut out of the project because of budget reasons first. It's oftentimes planned during the end of the project, but if development takes longer (which it often does) or scope creep comes in (which always happens), there is not enough time for QA anymore. We end up with an absolute minimum of unstructured testing and ship a digital house of cards with brittle walls. ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01hh7d1m00hwr4xxsratrk5p9k))

> Explaining that the software will be 'more stable' or 'make maintenance much easier' is not palpable for someone who doesn't work in the codebase themselves. We need to speak about money. As developers, we need to speak about the cost of not doing QA. This is the language of business and managers in general. By now, I always try to frame QA measures with examples like: 'If we don't do it now, development efforts (and therefore also costs) will be up 15% in 4 months.' or 'We need to implement unit tests for all features or our release stabilization phases will take longer and longer each time. Directly related to all the features that we build, because we need to test all side effects manually each time. This will result in us making less progress each release.' ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01hh7d4x78r41xvkm05vkb890p))---
title: "You Are Never Taught How to Build Quality Software"
url: https://www.florianbellmann.com/blog/never-taught-qa
author: Florian Bellmann
date: 2024-03-02
time: 10:01 PM
source: "reader"
aliases:
  - "You Are Never Taught How to Build Quality Software"
---
# You Are Never Taught How to Build Quality Software

## Highlights
> I have seen it countless times. QA standards and measures are the ones to be cut out of the project because of budget reasons first. It's oftentimes planned during the end of the project, but if development takes longer (which it often does) or scope creep comes in (which always happens), there is not enough time for QA anymore. We end up with an absolute minimum of unstructured testing and ship a digital house of cards with brittle walls. ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01hh7d1m00hwr4xxsratrk5p9k))

> Explaining that the software will be 'more stable' or 'make maintenance much easier' is not palpable for someone who doesn't work in the codebase themselves. We need to speak about money. As developers, we need to speak about the cost of not doing QA. This is the language of business and managers in general. By now, I always try to frame QA measures with examples like: 'If we don't do it now, development efforts (and therefore also costs) will be up 15% in 4 months.' or 'We need to implement unit tests for all features or our release stabilization phases will take longer and longer each time. Directly related to all the features that we build, because we need to test all side effects manually each time. This will result in us making less progress each release.' ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01hh7d4x78r41xvkm05vkb890p))

