---
title: "Cory Doctorow: What Kind of Bubble Is AI?"
url: https://locusmag.com/2023/12/commentary-cory-doctorow-what-kind-of-bubble-is-ai/
author: cdme
date: 2024-02-03
time: 5:39 PM
source: "reader"
aliases:
  - "Cory Doctorow: What Kind of Bubble Is AI?"
---
# Cory Doctorow: What Kind of Bubble Is AI?

## Highlights
> Contrast that bubble with, say, cryptocurrency/NFTs, or the complex financial derivatives that led up to the 2008 financial crisis. These crises left behind very little reusable residue. The expensively retrained physicists whom the finance sector taught to generate wildly defective risk-hedging algorithms were not able to apply that knowledge to create successor algorithms that were useful. The fraud of the cryptocurrency bubble was far more pervasive than the fraud in the dotcom bubble, so much so that without the fraud, there’s almost nothing left. A few programmers were trained in Rust, a very secure programming language that is broadly applicable elsewhere. But otherwise, the residue from crypto is a lot of bad digital art and worse Austrian economics. ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01hj1sxcyejwd30ax744xv64sm))

> Cruise, the “self-driving car” startup that was just forced to pull its cars off the streets of San Francisco, pays 1.5 staffers to supervise every car on the road. In other words, their AI replaces a single low-waged driver with 1.5 more expensive remote supervisors – and their cars still kill people. ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01hj1t4d7js7bzf3v853kx6t8d))

> Just take one step back and look at the hype through this lens. All the big, exciting uses for AI are either low-dollar (helping kids cheat on their homework, generating stock art for bottom-feeding publications) or high-stakes and fault-intolerant (self-driving cars, radiology, hiring, etc.). ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01hj1t5tqy0qzq5ctpqqp6xbmf))

