---
title: "The Cult of Mac"
url: https://pluralistic.net/2024/01/12/youre-holding-it-wrong/#if-dishwashers-were-iphones
author: headalgorithm
date: 2024-02-03
time: 5:39 PM
source: "reader"
aliases:
  - "The Cult of Mac"
---
# The Cult of Mac

## Highlights
> The comments on that article are *wild*. It's just a litany of people saying, "If you want to choose where you buy your apps, you shouldn't buy an iPhone." That this is exactly the same argument the fictional Absterge CEO makes about his dishwasher ("People who don’t want to go the Absterge way don’t have to") is lost on them. As far as they're concerned, any Apple customer who wants have the final say over how their $1,000 pocket computer works isn't a *true* Apple customer. ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01hkzs100yv7y53nnbrv8pg4vf))

> Remember: the *only people who could use an alternative iOS store are Apple customers*. Moore – a Minister from the Conservative Party – went on record saying that if you want to use your private, personal property in ways that the corporation that manufactured it objects to you, the government should step in to defend the corporation from you. ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01hkzs3g0xp0jnw8b5v0zb31k3))

> Again, this is obvious nonsense. If it were the case that No True Apple Customer would patronize a third-party repair depot, then Apple could simply step out of the way of right to repair campaigns and those independent phone fixit places would sink without a trace. ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01hkzs736cnyqg9c48hm57z4fd))

> But Apple's commitment to your privacy and security is always contingent, and when its own profits are on the line, the company will swiftly stuff you and your safety out the airlock. Apple refused to weaken its security for the FBI, but when China threatened its access to cheap manufacturing and hundreds of millions of customers, Apple eviscerated its products: ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01hkzs96jpvsbqhpzjetw7898k))

> This is some serious upside-down cult logic. *Beeper* isn't accessing Apple's infrastructure: Apple's *customers* are accessing Apple's infrastructure. If there were no Apple customers trying to talk to Android users, there would be no load on Apple's servers.
> But those customers don't count. They aren't real Apple customers, because they want to do things that benefit *them*, not Apple's shareholders. In other words: they're holding it wrong. ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01hkzsfvxcdx2vdp8xq0bhktgj))

