---
title: "Hell Is Other People: Performance Management at Big Tech"
url: https://lcamtuf.substack.com/p/hell-is-other-people-performance
author: zdw
date: 2024-01-30
time: 9:53 PM
source: "reader"
aliases:
  - "Hell Is Other People: Performance Management at Big Tech"
---
# Hell Is Other People: Performance Management at Big Tech

## Highlights
> Of course, the model imposed considerable burden across the company: once or twice a year, the entire business would grind to a halt as every employee was writing self-assessments and peer feedback, and then a significant proportion of senior staff was serving on committees. But the benefits seemed obvious — and well worth the price. ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01hne358jrd19er3863j7en834))

> Except, the benefits never really materialized. The problem is that every employee is judged by their ability to get work done; in most roles, this depends on being able to get along with others, including strangers with different sensibilities and unfamiliar backgrounds. Providing honest, critical feedback is a significant and ultimately unnecessary social risk. It doesn’t help that the burden of the process prompts most to put the bare minimum of effort into individual reviews; a handful of platitudes is usually enough to get you through it and get back to work. ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01hne35yyx7736ba55gkm2taby))

> In the end, the feedback for most employees ends up being overwhelmingly positive — and uniformly bland. The usual exceptions are the absolute worst performers who wouldn’t survive under any other performance management regime; as well as a handful of unlucky folks who deliver solid results but lack social grace and self-promotion skills. ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01hne36feg661sed89n39mvmh6))

> The illusion of a peer-driven system is maintained — but in reality, for layoffs and compensation, the manager almost always makes the call, and peer feedback seldom reveals anything new. ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01hne37dhj80t3w51pabe6jpay))