---
aliases:
  - 'Addressing "Documentation Debt" in Machine Learning Research: A Retrospective Datasheet for BookCorpus'
authors: "Jack Bandy, Nicholas Vincent"
date: '2024-02-05 21:32:53'
tags: []
title: 'Addressing "Documentation Debt" in Machine Learning Research: A Retrospective Datasheet for BookCorpus'
url: "https://arxiv.org/abs/2105.05241v1"
---

# Addressing "Documentation Debt" in Machine Learning Research: A Retrospective Datasheet for BookCorpus

## Abstract
Recent literature has underscored the importance of dataset documentation work for machine learning, and part of this work involves addressing "documentation debt" for datasets that have been used widely but documented sparsely. This paper aims to help address documentation debt for BookCorpus, a popular text dataset for training large language models. Notably, researchers have used BookCorpus to train OpenAI's GPT-N models and Google's BERT models, even though little to no documentation exists about the dataset's motivation, composition, collection process, etc. We offer a preliminary datasheet that provides key context and information about BookCorpus, highlighting several notable deficiencies. In particular, we find evidence that (1) BookCorpus likely violates copyright restrictions for many books, (2) BookCorpus contains thousands of duplicated books, and (3) BookCorpus exhibits significant skews in genre representation. We also find hints of other potential deficiencies that call for future research, including problematic content, potential skews in religious representation, and lopsided author contributions. While more work remains, this initial effort to provide a datasheet for BookCorpus adds to growing literature that urges more careful and systematic documentation for machine learning datasets.

> For one, we ﬁnd that many books contain copyright restrictions that should have prevented them from being distributed in BookCorpus and similar datasets. We also ﬁnd that thousands of books in BookCorpus are duplicated, with only 7,185 unique books out of 11,038 total. Third, we ﬁnd notable genre skews in the dataset, for example romance novels are signiﬁcantly over-represented compared to the newer BookCorpusOpen as well as the Smashwords21 superset. In addition to these three deﬁciencies, we also ﬁnd a number of potential deﬁciencies that motivate future work: Smashwords21 points to a range of potentially problematic content, skewed religious representation, and lopsided author contributions (with some super-authors publishing thousands of books). [(p. 2)](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/MZYN6ZLU?page=2)

> This work identified at least three immediate areas of concern with respect to BookCorpus: copyright violations, duplicate books, and genre skews. In terms of copyright violations, we found that many books contained copyright claims that should prevent distribution in the form of a free machine learning dataset. Many books explicitly claimed that they “may not be redistributed to others for commercial or non-commercial purposes,” and thus should not have been included in BookCorpus. Also, at least 406 books were included in BookCorpus for free even though the authors have since increased the price of the book. For example, the full text of Prodigy by Edward Mullen is in BookCorpus (as 366549.txt), even though the author now charges $1.99 to download the book from Smashwords [26]. [(p. 13)](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/MZYN6ZLU?page=13)

> A final area of concern is the skewed genre representation we identified in BookCorpus, which over-represented romance books. This skew may emerge from a broader pa ern in the self-publishing ebook industry, where authors consistently find that “kinky” romance novels are especially lucrative [15, 20, 32]. In other words, because romance is a dominant genre in the set of self-published ebooks, romance is also dominant in the subset of free ebooks. [(p. 14)](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/MZYN6ZLU?page=14)

```
@misc{Bandy_Vincent_2021, title={Addressing “Documentation Debt” in Machine Learning Research: A Retrospective Datasheet for BookCorpus}, url={[https://arxiv.org/abs/2105.05241v1](https://arxiv.org/abs/2105.05241v1)}, abstractNote={Recent literature has underscored the importance of dataset documentation work for machine learning, and part of this work involves addressing “documentation debt” for datasets that have been used widely but documented sparsely. This paper aims to help address documentation debt for BookCorpus, a popular text dataset for training large language models. Notably, researchers have used BookCorpus to train OpenAI’s GPT-N models and Google’s BERT models, even though little to no documentation exists about the dataset’s motivation, composition, collection process, etc. We offer a preliminary datasheet that provides key context and information about BookCorpus, highlighting several notable deficiencies. In particular, we find evidence that (1) BookCorpus likely violates copyright restrictions for many books, (2) BookCorpus contains thousands of duplicated books, and (3) BookCorpus exhibits significant skews in genre representation. We also find hints of other potential deficiencies that call for future research, including problematic content, potential skews in religious representation, and lopsided author contributions. While more work remains, this initial effort to provide a datasheet for BookCorpus adds to growing literature that urges more careful and systematic documentation for machine learning datasets.}, journal={arXiv.org}, author={Bandy, Jack and Vincent, Nicholas}, year={2021}, month=may, language={en} }
```