---
aliases:
  - The False Promise of Imitating Proprietary LLMs
authors: "Arnav Gudibande, Eric Wallace, Charlie Snell, Xinyang Geng, Hao Liu, Pieter Abbeel, Sergey Levine, Dawn Song"
date: '2023-06-25 18:54:25'
tags: []
title: "The False Promise of Imitating Proprietary LLMs"
url: "http://arxiv.org/abs/2305.15717"
---

# The False Promise of Imitating Proprietary LLMs

## Abstract
An emerging method to cheaply improve a weaker language model is to finetune it on outputs from a stronger model, such as a proprietary system like ChatGPT (e.g., Alpaca, Self-Instruct, and others). This approach looks to cheaply imitate the proprietary model's capabilities using a weaker open-source model. In this work, we critically analyze this approach. We first finetune a series of LMs that imitate ChatGPT using varying base model sizes (1.5B--13B), data sources, and imitation data amounts (0.3M--150M tokens). We then evaluate the models using crowd raters and canonical NLP benchmarks. Initially, we were surprised by the output quality of our imitation models -- they appear far better at following instructions, and crowd workers rate their outputs as competitive with ChatGPT. However, when conducting more targeted automatic evaluations, we find that imitation models close little to none of the gap from the base LM to ChatGPT on tasks that are not heavily supported in the imitation data. We show that these performance discrepancies may slip past human raters because imitation models are adept at mimicking ChatGPT's style but not its factuality. Overall, we conclude that model imitation is a false promise: there exists a substantial capabilities gap between open and closed LMs that, with current methods, can only be bridged using an unwieldy amount of imitation data or by using more capable base LMs. In turn, we argue that the highest leverage action for improving open-source models is to tackle the difficult challenge of developing better base LMs, rather than taking the shortcut of imitating proprietary systems.

<mark style="background: #5fb236">Initially, we were surprised by the output quality of our imitation models—they appear far better at following instructions, and crowd workers rate their outputs as competitive with ChatGPT. However, when conducting more targeted automatic evaluations, we find that imitation models close little to none of the gap from the base LM to ChatGPT on tasks that are not heavily supported in the imitation data.</mark> [(p. 1)](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/4C83PGN7?page=1)

<mark style="background: #ff6666">For example, training on 100k ChatGPT outputs from broad-coverage user inputs provides no benefits to Natural Questions accuracy (e.g., Figure 1, center), but training exclusively on ChatGPT responses for Natural-Questions-like queries drastically improves task accuracy. Consequently, we conclude that broadly matching ChatGPT using purely imitation would require (1) a concerted effort to collect enormous imitation datasets and (2) far more diverse and higher quality imitation data than is currently available.</mark> [(p. 2)](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/4C83PGN7?page=2)

<mark style="background: #ff6666">This implies that the higher leverage action for improving open-source LMs is to tackle the difficult challenge of developing better base models (e.g. by scaling up models, improving pre-training data quality, improving pre-training, etc.), rather than taking the shortcut of imitating proprietary systems. Nevertheless, we believe that model imitation has utility in subverting the need to annotate high-quality finetuning data if one has a sufficiently strong base LM.</mark> [(p. 3)](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/4C83PGN7?page=3)

<mark style="background: #5fb236">We find that GPT-4 and crowdworker evaluations show the same trends. As we scale up the amount of imitation data, GPT-4’s ratings of our imitation models are relatively flat (left). However, as we scale up the base model size, GPT-4’s rates the quality of our imitation models increasingly highly (right).</mark> [(p. 5)](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/4C83PGN7?page=5)

<mark style="background: #5fb236">We find that imitation models perform well according to human evaluations because they are adept at mimicking ChatGPT’s style—they output fluent, confident, and well-structured answers. In particular, we show in Table 2 that as we add more imitation data, ChatGPT and our imitation models produce outputs with a similar length, similar word choice, similar use of an authoritative tone, and similar low-level structure (e.g., use of lists).</mark> [(p. 7)](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/4C83PGN7?page=7)

```
@article{Gudibande_Wallace_Snell_Geng_Liu_Abbeel_Levine_Song_2023, title={The False Promise of Imitating Proprietary LLMs}, url={[http://arxiv.org/abs/2305.15717](http://arxiv.org/abs/2305.15717)}, DOI={[10.48550/arXiv.2305.15717](https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2305.15717)}, abstractNote={An emerging method to cheaply improve a weaker language model is to finetune it on outputs from a stronger model, such as a proprietary system like ChatGPT (e.g., Alpaca, Self-Instruct, and others). This approach looks to cheaply imitate the proprietary model’s capabilities using a weaker open-source model. In this work, we critically analyze this approach. We first finetune a series of LMs that imitate ChatGPT using varying base model sizes (1.5B--13B), data sources, and imitation data amounts (0.3M--150M tokens). We then evaluate the models using crowd raters and canonical NLP benchmarks. Initially, we were surprised by the output quality of our imitation models -- they appear far better at following instructions, and crowd workers rate their outputs as competitive with ChatGPT. However, when conducting more targeted automatic evaluations, we find that imitation models close little to none of the gap from the base LM to ChatGPT on tasks that are not heavily supported in the imitation data. We show that these performance discrepancies may slip past human raters because imitation models are adept at mimicking ChatGPT’s style but not its factuality. Overall, we conclude that model imitation is a false promise: there exists a substantial capabilities gap between open and closed LMs that, with current methods, can only be bridged using an unwieldy amount of imitation data or by using more capable base LMs. In turn, we argue that the highest leverage action for improving open-source models is to tackle the difficult challenge of developing better base LMs, rather than taking the shortcut of imitating proprietary systems.}, note={arXiv:2305.15717 [cs]}, number={arXiv:2305.15717}, publisher={arXiv}, author={Gudibande, Arnav and Wallace, Eric and Snell, Charlie and Geng, Xinyang and Liu, Hao and Abbeel, Pieter and Levine, Sergey and Song, Dawn}, year={2023}, month={May} }
```

%% Import Date: 2023-06-25T18:55:07.919+01:00 %%