---
id: 3f673dd8-2634-41e7-9c4d-6c02e08f94f9
aliases:
  - "The Shirky Principle: Institutions Try to Preserve the Problem to Which They Are the Solution – Effectiviology"
title: "The Shirky Principle: Institutions Try to Preserve the Problem to Which They Are the Solution – Effectiviology"
date: 2024-02-24 17:39:21
url: https://effectiviology.com/shirky-principle/
tags: []
created: 2024-03-02
modified: 2024-05-05
---

# The Shirky Principle: Institutions Try to Preserve the Problem to Which They Are the Solution – Effectiviology

[Read on Omnivore](https://omnivore.app/me/the-shirky-principle-institutions-try-to-preserve-the-problem-to-18ddc333b35)

[Read Original](https://effectiviology.com/shirky-principle/)

## Highlights

> The _Shirky principle_ is the adage that “institutions will try to preserve the problem to which they are the solution”. More broadly, it can also be characterized as the adage that “every entity tends to prolong the problem it is solving”. [⤴️](https://omnivore.app/me/the-shirky-principle-institutions-try-to-preserve-the-problem-to-18ddc333b35#c8bec13a-7ef9-48ee-9d66-c157e3f8fc67)  ^c8bec13a

> Finally, note that the phenomenon described by the Shirky principle—entities prolonging a problem to which they are the solution—isn’t necessarily the result of intentional actions. For example, a company may inadvertently perpetuate the problem that it solves, because its processes are so focused on the mediocre solution that they’re currently selling, that they don’t realize a better solution exists. Similarly, a company may discourage the use of a certain approach to solving a problem because it previously failed for them, even after technological advancements make this approach viable. [⤴️](https://omnivore.app/me/the-shirky-principle-institutions-try-to-preserve-the-problem-to-18ddc333b35#482d3a5b-8107-4a59-bdf9-b6deab91541e)  ^482d3a5b

> Essentially, in his writing on the topic, Kelly offers three formulations of the Shirky principle, which differ in subtle but important ways:
> 
> * The first formulation—“Institutions will try to preserve the problem to which they are the solution”—refers to _institutions_, and states that they will _try_ to preserve problems, which implies that they do so intentionally.
> * The second formulation—“Complex solutions (like a company, or an industry) can become so dedicated to the problem they are the solution to, that often they inadvertently perpetuate the problem”—refers to _complex solutions_, and states that they often _inadvertently_ perpetuate the problem, which implies that they do so unintentionally.
> * The third formulation—”Every entity tends to prolong the problem it is solving”—refers to _entities_, and states that they _tend to_ prolong problems, without making any claim about their intentions. [⤴️](https://omnivore.app/me/the-shirky-principle-institutions-try-to-preserve-the-problem-to-18ddc333b35#01ad2c49-c071-44ab-a9a5-fbc874e43099)  ^01ad2c49

> _Note_: In [his post](http://web.archive.org/web/20210508141233/https:/kk.org/thetechnium/the-shirky-prin/), Kelly states that Shirky’s observation reminds him “of the clarity of the Peter Principle, which says that a person in an organization will be promoted to the level of their incompetence. At which point their past achievements will prevent them from being fired, but their incompetence at this new level will prevent them from being promoted again, so they stagnate in their incompetence.”. [⤴️](https://omnivore.app/me/the-shirky-principle-institutions-try-to-preserve-the-problem-to-18ddc333b35#9adbdb7a-59c5-4215-87ee-95acf69424c6)  ^9adbdb7a

> There are some caveats about the Shirly principle that are important to keep in mind:
> 
> * **The Shirky principle is just a general observation.** As such, there are many situations where it’s incorrect. For example, an institution may successfully solve the problem to which they are the solution because there’s greater profit to be made that way than by prolonging the problem.
> * **The Shirky principle can involve various types of entities.** Though the best-known formulation of the Shirky principle refers to “institutions”, this principle can apply to various types of entities, including individuals and small social groups. This is noted in the general formulation of the principle (“every entity tends to prolong the problem it is solving”).
> * **The Shirky principle can involve various causes.** For example, one company may prolong a problem unintentionally, due to passivity or inertia, whereas another company may prolong a problem intentionally, due to greed or self-preservation. This is reflected in the general formulation of this principle, which doesn’t make any claims regarding the causes or intentionality of this phenomenon.
> * **The Shirky principle can involve various patterns of behavior.** For example, one company may prolong an existing problem by not dedicating resources to developing new solutions, whereas another company may actively prevent others from developing such solutions. [⤴️](https://omnivore.app/me/the-shirky-principle-institutions-try-to-preserve-the-problem-to-18ddc333b35#dc33b2ab-393b-473e-b48d-730f27d7a5fd)  ^dc33b2ab

> Based on this, a broader version of Shirky’s principle can be expressed as:
> 
> > “Entities often promote problems that they benefit from”. [⤴️](https://omnivore.app/me/the-shirky-principle-institutions-try-to-preserve-the-problem-to-18ddc333b35#847ddb4b-1c0f-4848-b504-2ff9b6964048)  ^847ddb4b

> Finally, there are also two useful concepts worth keeping in mind when accounting for Shirky’s principle:
> 
> * [_**Cui bono**_](https://effectiviology.com/cui-bono/), which is a Latin phrase that means “who benefits?”, and which is used to suggest that there’s a high probability that those responsible for a certain event are the ones who stand to gain from it.
> * [_**Hanlon’s razor**_](https://effectiviology.com/hanlons-razor/), which is the adage that you should “never attribute to malice that which is adequately explained by stupidity”, and which, when applied broadly, suggests that when assessing people’s actions, you should not assume that they acted out of a desire to cause harm, as long as there is a reasonable alternative explanation. [⤴️](https://omnivore.app/me/the-shirky-principle-institutions-try-to-preserve-the-problem-to-18ddc333b35#f490fb32-0397-4b6d-9a28-3b8682035aec)  ^f490fb32

> In addition, a similar famous concept that’s related to Shirky’s principle has been expressed by novelist and social reformer Upton Sinclair, who [said](http://web.archive.org/web/20210507155626/https:/www.oxfordreference.com/view/10.1093/acref/9780191826719.001.0001/q-oro-ed4-00010168) that “It is difficult to get a man to understand something when his salary depends on his not understanding it.” [⤴️](https://omnivore.app/me/the-shirky-principle-institutions-try-to-preserve-the-problem-to-18ddc333b35#13add538-3208-431e-b416-a352036b213b)  ^13add538

