---
id: f0861814-812e-4153-a0f6-a62c7cc5dae4
aliases:
  - The work of creation in the age of AI | Andrew Perfors
title: "The work of creation in the age of AI | Andrew Perfors"
author: |
  Andrew Perfors
date: 2024-03-06 08:41:15
url: https://perfors.net/blog/creation-ai/
tags: []
---

# The work of creation in the age of AI | Andrew Perfors

[Read on Omnivore](https://omnivore.app/me/the-work-of-creation-in-the-age-of-ai-andrew-perfors-18e12ec89de)

[Read Original](https://perfors.net/blog/creation-ai/)

## Highlights

> The essay is far too complex to do justice in a blog post, but the basic point that stuck with me was that the authenticity of a piece of art doesn’t just lie in the art itself but also in the context in which it’s embedded. [⤴️](https://omnivore.app/me/the-work-of-creation-in-the-age-of-ai-andrew-perfors-18e12ec89de#a8dfd831-331b-4734-b5c3-42540f24651a)  ^a8dfd831

> But, whatever the intent happens to be, our thoughts and actions occur in the service of some goal or another. Their meaning derives from the fact that the nature of the transformation can be understood given those goals, the world we live in, the constraints we are operating under, and the data we have access to. [⤴️](https://omnivore.app/me/the-work-of-creation-in-the-age-of-ai-andrew-perfors-18e12ec89de#2578703a-c82f-4a58-96ad-270512ea93fa)  ^2578703a

> Meaning comes from the intent behind a creation, and thus emerges from the process of realising that intent. It exists in a creation to the extent that the process by which it was generated reflects the true intent of the person who created it. [⤴️](https://omnivore.app/me/the-work-of-creation-in-the-age-of-ai-andrew-perfors-18e12ec89de#f342624d-d0f5-4484-9641-442c9f47442b)  ^f342624d

> Because humans are meaning-makers, it happens all of the time. We imbue meaning everywhere, often, even to things whose creation involved no intent or agency at all. Indeed, we very often assign meaning _by_ assuming agency or intent. This is the impetus behind virtually all of the world’s religions, on some level; natural phenomena are explained by inferring the existence of agents – gods – and the characteristics of those phenomena can be understood through the lens of the goals of the gods. [⤴️](https://omnivore.app/me/the-work-of-creation-in-the-age-of-ai-andrew-perfors-18e12ec89de#8337be8a-3301-4f10-bfd6-bad8eab16f05)  ^8337be8a

> All those things I did are part of the meaning, because they reflect my intent. That intent is now visible to you in the thousands of tiny assumptions I made about you, which shaped my word choice and emphasis and presumed common ground and many, many other things. My intent is evident in the choice of picture[8](#fn:8) I posted it with and the level of care I put in and the way I wrote it, including the occasional lapses into colloquialisms as well as nerdspeak. Deep Meaning turns what was originally an isolated act of creation into something that is now fundamentally communicative and connection-oriented. _The traces of that are visible everywhere in the creation._ [⤴️](https://omnivore.app/me/the-work-of-creation-in-the-age-of-ai-andrew-perfors-18e12ec89de#bb06e07f-5097-4710-9da8-0a25132099f5)  ^bb06e07f

> Let’s take image generation as an example. Suppose you want to create a picture of, I dunno, a wolf bounding through the trees. That purpose – that desire – will still be there in the picture that is created when you give an AI a prompt like “wolf bounding through trees.” But that desire is _all_ the meaning that will be there. That is the only part of the process that came from you; the rest came from the AI. Conversely, if you had drawn a wolf bounding through the trees, you would have had to make thousands of tiny choices while making the drawing: how big is the wolf? Is it fierce or cowering? What colour is it? How visible is it in the trees? Are the trees part of a dark and dense wood, or one or two saplings on the edge of a plain? The details of the wolf, the sky, the plants, the ambiance, and so much more than I can possibly express in a paragraph – all of these are things you would have had to think about and make choices about. The choices might not have been conscious or thoroughly considered, but they would still have come from _you_. And the skill behind the drawing, the ability to translate the image in your head to the canvas – that, also, reflects a deep part of you and would have shaped the final product in profound ways. The effort and intent that went into those choices and that skill are what would have formed most of the meaning of that image. They are completely absent from the AI-generated image. [⤴️](https://omnivore.app/me/the-work-of-creation-in-the-age-of-ai-andrew-perfors-18e12ec89de#1f1c4b94-7191-46be-ba8c-150226d36fa9)  ^1f1c4b94

> An AI couldn’t have written this blog post. The amount of strategic prompt engineering and curation required to get this from an AI would have been far more work than just writing it. I’d go even further and say that I doubt whether I could have gotten this with _any_ level of prompt engineering, because I only fully figured out what I was going to say, myself, by trying to write the thing in the first place. I had the basic idea before I began writing, but the refinement of the idea – the details that make the essay work – came only by thinking a lot about the meaning I was trying to convey as I wrote it. I simply can’t imagine how a process of refining prompts would have gotten me to that point. Even if I’d started from a generic essay (created by a simple prompt) and edited it, the only way to have gotten from that to this would have been if I edited it so much there was nothing left from the AI in the first place. And that would almost certainly have been more work, because I’d have had to expend time trying to figure out what part of the blather it produced captured what I was saying, what was rubbish, what was correct but badly stated, how to stitch it together, and so forth.[9](#fn:9) [⤴️](https://omnivore.app/me/the-work-of-creation-in-the-age-of-ai-andrew-perfors-18e12ec89de#43068333-31f5-4c5b-8549-656ff11a55f3)  ^43068333

> Is the wolf that particular shade of brown because the model decided to make it so, or because the human prompted that? Does the essay use that word because the human mind behind it thought it was the best way to express the meaning they intended to convey, or because the AI selected it as statistically most probable?
> 
> We simply cannot tell. And that means we (as the audience) cannot engage in our end of the rich process that underlies Deep Meaning: we cannot do anything but extremely shallow interpretation. Moreover, there is no mind on the other end to _respond_ to our interpretation. The reciprocal interaction loop that Deep Meaning requires is destroyed when we place AI in the middle; it eats away at this vital, deeply human thing until very little is left. [⤴️](https://omnivore.app/me/the-work-of-creation-in-the-age-of-ai-andrew-perfors-18e12ec89de#7ba55a98-cd0e-47b4-b236-8f3a9e3111d4)  ^7ba55a98

> That thing they’re shoving in my face might have the surface form of something that matters, but it no more contains meaning than a corpse contains the essence of a person. And I find it gross and disturbing to be asked to act as if I believe otherwise.
> 
> _AI-generated content is a perversion of creation_. I choose that word deliberately: it perverts something important and sacred (Deep Meaning) into something far more shallow and senseless (Projected Meaning). To the extent that there is any meaning in the “creations” of an AI, it is meaning that we, the audience, project onto it. But because the surface form is so much like something with Deep Meaning, it can be very hard for us to remember this. And so we find ourselves feeling curiously unsatiated, knowing that it wasn’t _right_ in some fundamental way, but not knowing why. [⤴️](https://omnivore.app/me/the-work-of-creation-in-the-age-of-ai-andrew-perfors-18e12ec89de#d48e2504-9495-49e8-85b9-8174e35df7ff)  ^d48e2504

> The purpose of having students write an essay is not to fill the world with yet more words on the topic of the essay: the point is to find out _what my students think about the topic_. Actually, the point is even deeper – it is to make them go through the process of figuring out for _themselves_ what they think, and to wrestle with putting those thoughts into words so that they can clarify things to themselves and improve their ability to share those thoughts clearly. This process cannot be short-circuited by outsourcing it to AI; to do so removes _the entire fucking point_. [⤴️](https://omnivore.app/me/the-work-of-creation-in-the-age-of-ai-andrew-perfors-18e12ec89de#3df9380a-4dd3-453e-8bf1-6129d27845ac)  ^3df9380a

> We lose so much of what learning should be if the goal of education becomes to pass it to an AI and then fiddle with the content it outputs. We are outsourcing a real part of our humanity, our creativity, to a machine, and not recognising the cost. [⤴️](https://omnivore.app/me/the-work-of-creation-in-the-age-of-ai-andrew-perfors-18e12ec89de#9335b7f2-da39-4e2f-9204-d5a00d481daf)  ^9335b7f2

