---
id: b4137d85-e820-40a2-97a7-426becd30c39
alias:
  - How I Rewired My Brain to Become Fluent in Math - Nautilus
title: "How I Rewired My Brain to Become Fluent in Math - Nautilus"
author: |
  Barbara Oakley
date: 2024-04-27 13:42:38
url: https://nautil.us/how-i-rewired-my-brain-to-become-fluent-in-math-235085/
created: 2024-05-05
modified: 2024-05-05
---

# How I Rewired My Brain to Become Fluent in Math - Nautilus

[Read on Omnivore](https://omnivore.app/me/how-i-rewired-my-brain-to-become-fluent-in-math-nautilus-18f1f9438cb)

[Read Original](https://nautil.us/how-i-rewired-my-brain-to-become-fluent-in-math-235085/)

## Highlights

> The problem with focusing relentlessly on understanding is that math and science students can often grasp essentials of an important idea, but this understanding can quickly slip away without consolidation through practice and repetition. Worse, students often believe they understand something when, in fact, they don’t. By championing the importance of understanding, teachers can inadvertently set their students up for failure as those students blunder in illusions of competence. As one (failing) engineering student recently told me: “I just don’t see how I could have done so poorly. I understood it when you taught it in class.” My student may have thought he’d understood it at the time, and perhaps he did, but he’d never practiced using the concept to truly internalize it. He had not developed any kind of procedural fluency or ability to apply what he thought he understood. [⤴️](https://omnivore.app/me/how-i-rewired-my-brain-to-become-fluent-in-math-nautilus-18f1f9438cb#6306d832-8bb0-46d2-ab04-75fd155872bc)  ^6306d832

> Gradually, neuroscientists came to realize that experts such as chess grand masters are experts because they have stored thousands of chunks of knowledge about their area of expertise in their long-term memory. Chess masters, for example, can recall tens of thousands of different chess patterns. Whatever the discipline, experts can call up to consciousness one or several of these well-knit-together, chunked neural subroutines to analyze and react to a new learning situation. This level of true understanding, and ability to use that understanding in new situations, comes only with the kind of rigor and familiarity that repetition, memorization, and practice can foster. [⤴️](https://omnivore.app/me/how-i-rewired-my-brain-to-become-fluent-in-math-nautilus-18f1f9438cb#b2978e24-d9e3-47b6-a3e0-9766dfc01719)  ^b2978e24

> As studies of chess masters, emergency room physicians, and fighter pilots have shown, in times of critical stress, conscious analysis of a situation is replaced by quick, subconscious processing as these experts rapidly draw on their deeply ingrained repertoire of neural subroutines—chunks. [⤴️](https://omnivore.app/me/how-i-rewired-my-brain-to-become-fluent-in-math-nautilus-18f1f9438cb#51c03dcd-9c4a-4710-b730-48364a4dca22)  ^51c03dcd

> Understanding doesn’t build fluency; instead, fluency builds understanding. In fact, I believe that true understanding of a complex subject comes only from fluency. [⤴️](https://omnivore.app/me/how-i-rewired-my-brain-to-become-fluent-in-math-nautilus-18f1f9438cb#240372bd-586f-4cf5-89e6-46af806d0877)  ^240372bd

