---
id: 2e1dc9b9-4808-4c8f-b0f6-288dd8bee87b
alias:
  - Are Video Generation Models World Simulators? · Artificial Cognition
title: Are Video Generation Models World Simulators? · Artificial Cognition
author: |
  Raphaël Millière
date: 2024-02-29 20:10:25
url: https://artificialcognition.net/posts/video-generation-world-simulators/
---

# Are Video Generation Models World Simulators? · Artificial Cognition

[Read on Omnivore](https://omnivore.app/me/are-video-generation-models-world-simulators-artificial-cognitio-18df67d53de)

[Read Original](https://artificialcognition.net/posts/video-generation-world-simulators/)

## Highlights

> These bold statements are taken from blog posts – including the terse “technical report” – that can only be characterized as marketing documents rather than academic articles (let alone peer-reviewed research). [⤴️](https://omnivore.app/me/are-video-generation-models-world-simulators-artificial-cognitio-18df67d53de#164d0428-94b2-45f4-a34d-00e7b316f0ce)  ^164d0428

> The problem with this hypothesis, as stated, is that it’s extremely vague. What would it actually mean for a video generation model to simulate the physical world? And what kind of evidence could support that claim? [⤴️](https://omnivore.app/me/are-video-generation-models-world-simulators-artificial-cognitio-18df67d53de#fdbe79b0-c241-463e-928b-6b80226902fd)  ^fdbe79b0

> We’re getting closer to a clear statement of the simulation hypothesis: a good-enough video generation model based on an end-to-end neural network architecture with a finite set of parameters should be expected to acquire internal models of the physical world during training, because this is the most effective way – perhaps the only way – for such a neural network to generate coherent and realistic videos of arbitrary scenes. [⤴️](https://omnivore.app/me/are-video-generation-models-world-simulators-artificial-cognitio-18df67d53de#b1997f5f-403c-4bad-9d88-5a8f8c774d8e)  ^b1997f5f

> But game engines don’t typically model these laws either. While they might simulate heat effects (fire, explosions) and work (objects moving against friction), these simulations are usually highly abstracted and do not adhere strictly to thermodynamic equations. They simply don’t need to, because their focus is on the visual and interactive believability of the rendered scene rather than strict physical accuracy. Could Sora be doing something similar? If we want to begin answering this question, we need to talk about intuitive physics. [⤴️](https://omnivore.app/me/are-video-generation-models-world-simulators-artificial-cognitio-18df67d53de#48f5afec-2ea4-4763-938f-fcb289015105)  ^48f5afec

> Where does that leave us? Here is the bottom line: when it comes to humans, at least, it is tempting to explain intuitive physical reasoning by postulating the existence of an IPE that performs probabilistic mental simulations about physical scenarios using approximate principles. This hypothesis is still debated, and there is arguably evidence for and against it. But there is at least a relatively plausible and well-thought-out case to be made for the simulation hypothesis, with a rich experimental literature to back it up. [⤴️](https://omnivore.app/me/are-video-generation-models-world-simulators-artificial-cognitio-18df67d53de#bee5c7a2-e4be-45e1-96f2-434e49258ac6)  ^bee5c7a2

> In machine learning research, it mostly originates in the literature on model-based reinforcement learning, particularly from Juergen Schmidhuber’s lab in the 1990s. In this context, a world model refers to an agent’s internal representation of the external environment it interacts with. Specifically, given a state of the environment and an agent action, a world model can predict a future state of the environment if the agent were to take that action. [⤴️](https://omnivore.app/me/are-video-generation-models-world-simulators-artificial-cognitio-18df67d53de#1fd92c40-8a81-44d9-a33b-073b0f9df165)  ^1fd92c40

> The aptly titled “World Models” paper by Ha and Schmidhuber (2018) expands on this idea in interesting ways.[23](#fn:23) The world model incorporates a sensory component that processes raw observations and compresses them into a compact encoding. [⤴️](https://omnivore.app/me/are-video-generation-models-world-simulators-artificial-cognitio-18df67d53de#573c7695-28c5-4979-aa5b-15f2d19f2f6a)  ^573c7695

> What does it mean for a neural network to _represent_ a property? Philosophical theories of representation suggest several key criteria:[30](#fn:30)
> 
> 1. The network must contain a pattern of activation that encodes correlational information about the target property;
> 2. The network must actually make use of the encoded information to generate outputs;
> 3. The pattern of activation that encodes correlational information about the target property may misrepresent that property for particular inputs in ways that degrade model performance. [⤴️](https://omnivore.app/me/are-video-generation-models-world-simulators-artificial-cognitio-18df67d53de#79df1014-9051-42e2-ae94-89eff29112c5)  ^79df1014

> This suggests that latent diffusion models do much more than fitting to the surface statistics of pixel space. They induce latent information about depth and saliency because such information is useful for the objective of generating realistic looking images. This is strongly reminiscent of how Othello-GPT induces latent information about the board state because such information is useful for the objective of predicting game moves. [⤴️](https://omnivore.app/me/are-video-generation-models-world-simulators-artificial-cognitio-18df67d53de#ad7bb82b-fbe3-400b-baef-14c77bb2fcf0)  ^ad7bb82b

> The fact that Sora’s outputs clearly can get things wrong about intuitive physics – just as Stable Diffusion’s outputs can get things wrong about projective geometry – does not rule out the hypothesis that the model represents _some_ aspects of 3D geometry and dynamics consistently. If there is anything there like “world model” in the weaker sense defined above, it is certainly not a perfect or complete one; it is likely to be patchy in various ways. Take Stable Diffusion’s latent representation of depth, for example; it clearly affects the generative process in highly nontrivial ways, even though it is merely approximative. The same could be true of Sora’s representations. [⤴️](https://omnivore.app/me/are-video-generation-models-world-simulators-artificial-cognitio-18df67d53de#e1106164-9e1f-435b-8638-63c76fc91c28)  ^e1106164

> but it might be shaped by latent representations of key aspects of 3D geometry and dynamics. In that latter (and weaker) sense, it is rather plausible that Sora has a limited “world model”, in the same way as latent diffusion models used for image generation have a – more limited still – “world model”. [⤴️](https://omnivore.app/me/are-video-generation-models-world-simulators-artificial-cognitio-18df67d53de#a45620f1-0e6c-45be-ac15-ccaaa3e377de)  ^a45620f1

