---
id: 29df46ae-c21d-4b81-8388-0cd5020a0cf7
alias:
  - Obituary for a Quiet Life — THE BITTER SOUTHERNER
title: Obituary for a Quiet Life — THE BITTER SOUTHERNER
date: 2024-04-14 08:41:03
url: https://bittersoutherner.com/feature/2023/obituary-for-a-quiet-life
---

# Obituary for a Quiet Life — THE BITTER SOUTHERNER

[Read on Omnivore](https://omnivore.app/me/https-bittersoutherner-com-feature-2023-obituary-for-a-quiet-lif-18edb8d62b6)

[Read Original](https://bittersoutherner.com/feature/2023/obituary-for-a-quiet-life)

## Highlights

> They’re taking out the trash before we notice and walking up the road to see if the mail’s come. They’re showing us how to lay out the biscuit dough at just the right thickness. They took our sons up on the tractor on spring afternoons. They helped the neighbor with the busted sink. They jumped in the river to pull an 18-month-old out. They caught the man who’d been pinned by the forklift, his back broken, and held him as he died. They slipped money into their nephew’s pocket when he hadn’t a penny to his name but was too ashamed to admit it. They did the laundry. They swept the floor. They played in the yard like a kid. They ate a pack of saltines and climbed into bed night after night until there were no more nights, only all the people left behind who’d carry on living because making a little life on a piece of land off Fruitland Road is about the holiest thing we can think of. 
> 
> All around us are these lives — heads down and arms open — that ignore the siren call of flashy American individualism, of bright lights and center stage. _I’m fine right here_ is the response from the edge of the room, and that contentment is downright subversive. _How could you want only that?_ the world demands. _There’s more to have, always more._ [⤴️](https://omnivore.app/me/https-bittersoutherner-com-feature-2023-obituary-for-a-quiet-lif-18edb8d62b6#759269bd-a196-4cb7-ac4b-c6a8e23988ef)  ^759269bd

> “You done good,” I said because that’s how he would’ve said it, but also because that’s how I meant it. He’d done so much good, even if it couldn’t be listed on official records or captured in the stat sheet of an obituary. The good of his life was ever-rippling water, quiet and steady, and my boys and I would long be swept up in it. [⤴️](https://omnivore.app/me/https-bittersoutherner-com-feature-2023-obituary-for-a-quiet-lif-18edb8d62b6#f0a649e2-a57e-4315-85cb-ca76df46ac3d)  ^f0a649e2

