---
id: 39a46bde-de80-41e5-80c3-d056b56cc455
alias:
  - Doing their hype for them • Buttondown
title: "Doing their hype for them • Buttondown"
author: |
  Mystery AI Hype Theater 3000: The Newsletter
date: 2024-04-02 19:23:03
url: https://buttondown.email/maiht3k/archive/doing-their-hype-for-them/
---

# Doing their hype for them • Buttondown

[Read on Omnivore](https://omnivore.app/me/doing-their-hype-for-them-buttondown-18ea00ce39f)

[Read Original](https://buttondown.email/maiht3k/archive/doing-their-hype-for-them/)

## Highlights

> A clearer-eyed view of what has happened in the last two years is that a few companies have amassed enormous amounts of data (mostly taken non-consensually) and the capital to buy the computing resources to train enormous models which, in turn, can be used to output facsimiles of the kinds of interactions represented in the data. So we have the ability to get text on demand that _looks like_ legal contracts, or _looks like_ medical diagnoses, or _looks like_ therapeutic conversations, or _looks like_ a news article, or _looks like_ scientific research papers. But it actually is none of those things, because in all cases the textual artifact isn't really the point; the point is rather the thought processes and relationship-building that led to and follow from the textual artifact. (The sort-of exception here is legal contracts, where the textual artifacts are very much the point, except that the whole task is designing a textual artifact that meets the needs of the parties entering into the contract. Those needs usually extend well beyond "a text that has some nice legalese in it and otherwise looks like a contract.") [⤴️](https://omnivore.app/me/doing-their-hype-for-them-buttondown-18ea00ce39f#cd487916-337b-4099-9f49-ac8cc4f7a4e7)  ^cd487916

> It adds insult to industry to say that higher ed should be (and is failing at) keeping pace with this purported rapid progress. To suggest that higher ed is about training students to produce the form of all of those things fundamentally misses the point of higher ed (or all education, really). [⤴️](https://omnivore.app/me/doing-their-hype-for-them-buttondown-18ea00ce39f#c079a458-7e1d-4c5f-8e0e-bf0b4a8173b5)  ^c079a458

> Characterizing a task as a mapping from inputs to outputs might be appropriate for machine learning. But if we adopt that as a way to understand what people do, we are complicit in the [dehumanziation](https://faculty.washington.edu/ebender/papers/Bender-2024-preprint.pdf) so rampant in the production and sales of so-called "AI". I expect better from people involved in higher education and people reporting on higher education, and I hope you do, too. [⤴️](https://omnivore.app/me/doing-their-hype-for-them-buttondown-18ea00ce39f#17b666ad-5e30-47e0-97a2-ac7f1b1b4a9f)  ^17b666ad

