---
id: a7f356f8-c6c2-11ee-b2e7-1733e32847d2
alias:
  - "Pluralistic: Big Tech disrupted disruption (08 Feb 2024) – Pluralistic: Daily links from Cory Doctorow"
title: "Pluralistic: Big Tech disrupted disruption (08 Feb 2024) – Pluralistic: Daily links from Cory Doctorow"
date: 2024-02-08 23:19:26
url: https://pluralistic.net/2024/02/08/permanent-overlords/
---

# Pluralistic: Big Tech disrupted disruption (08 Feb 2024) – Pluralistic: Daily links from Cory Doctorow

[Read on Omnivore](https://omnivore.app/me/pluralistic-big-tech-disrupted-disruption-08-feb-2024-pluralisti-18d8a75aaf1)

[Read Original](https://pluralistic.net/2024/02/08/permanent-overlords/)

## Highlights

> A startup, by contrast, has no existing successful divisions and no giant customers to safeguard. They have nothing to lose and everything to gain from disruption. Where a large company has no way for individual employees to initiate major changes in corporate strategy, a startup has fewer hops between employees and management. What's more, a startup that rewards an employee's good idea with a stock-grant ties that employee's future finances to the outcome of that idea – while a giant corporation's stock bonuses are only incidentally tied to the ideas of any individual worker. [⤴️](https://omnivore.app/me/pluralistic-big-tech-disrupted-disruption-08-feb-2024-pluralisti-18d8a75aaf1#21bc667f-e94f-4513-8ccf-c57defbc7f5f)  ^21bc667f

> These data policies cast a long shadow. They don't just block existing companies from accessing the data they need to pursue disruptive offerings – they also "send a message" to would-be founders and investors, letting them know that if they try to disrupt a tech giant, they will have their market oxygen cut off before they can draw breath. The only way to build a product that challenges Facebook as Facebook's partner, under Facebook's direction, with Facebook's veto. [⤴️](https://omnivore.app/me/pluralistic-big-tech-disrupted-disruption-08-feb-2024-pluralisti-18d8a75aaf1#163ea178-f97d-4292-aa45-567a9ae01033)  ^163ea178

> Big Tech claims to be innovating, but it's really just operationalizing. Any company that threatens to disrupt a tech giant is bought, its products stripped of any really innovative features, and the residue is added to existing products as a "sustaining innovation" – a dot-release feature that has all the innovative disruption of rounding the corners on a new mobile phone. [⤴️](https://omnivore.app/me/pluralistic-big-tech-disrupted-disruption-08-feb-2024-pluralisti-18d8a75aaf1#7a33342f-f933-44e1-80bd-823157f958af)  ^7a33342f

