---
id: d48d7cf6-affa-46f7-b2b4-283cde48dc0a
alias:
  - We need more calm companies
title: "We need more calm companies"
date: 2024-04-13 02:17:03
url: https://justinjackson.ca/calm-company/
created: 2024-04-14
modified: 2024-04-21
---

# We need more calm companies

[Read on Omnivore](https://omnivore.app/me/https-justinjackson-ca-calm-company-18ed5077a18)

[Read Original](https://justinjackson.ca/calm-company/)

## Highlights

> A calm company's purpose is to provide exceptional service to customers while simultaneously improving the lives of the people who work there. [⤴️](https://omnivore.app/me/https-justinjackson-ca-calm-company-18ed5077a18#6694f01b-05f3-4f78-b489-3337a996e33a)  ^6694f01b

> Here is my list of Calm Company attributes:
> 
> 1. **Profitability**: A strong financial engine gives you more freedom. Profits help you invest more significantly in your product and your team (and their families). Most businesses that struggle don't have a financial engine that's working well.
> 2. **Purpose**: A solid financial foundation complements the company's core purpose—to improve lives, provide exceptional service, and create a nurturing environment for employees. Success encompasses impact and profitability, measured by the positive effects on the team and the broader community.
> 3. **Sustainable Growth**: Growth should be mindful and sustainable. Avoid rapid expansion that sacrifices the company's culture, quality, or values. Growing the company should serve a purpose. Ambition is good, but not at the expense of well-being.
> 4. **Freedom and Flexibility**: As founders, we build businesses to give us more freedom. A Calm Company gives team members the flexibility to live well, pursue hobbies, exercise, take breaks, go on trips, and connect with family and friends.
> 5. **Mindful Decision-Making**: Decisions and commitments are made mindfully. Ask: will this decision make our lives worse? More stressful? Does it align with our values?
> 6. **Calm Work Environment**: Stress and chaos are replaced with clear work goals, boundaries, and communication. [⤴️](https://omnivore.app/me/https-justinjackson-ca-calm-company-18ed5077a18#53f26531-86f2-44c9-946b-c9bfe7d35fd9)  ^53f26531

> A frenzied company is perpetually in crisis. They have a culture of impossible deadlines and unrealistic expectations. [⤴️](https://omnivore.app/me/https-justinjackson-ca-calm-company-18ed5077a18#5f0ee780-929d-4b90-9f52-05d89dd31e62)  ^5f0ee780

> Building a calm company has meant saying no to opportunities that don't align with our values. We've purposefully declined complicated enterprise contracts that would require us to staff up, add more compliance, and sign complicated legal contracts. We try not to commit to projects that burn us out. We've prioritized doing work that we enjoy and that brings customers value. [⤴️](https://omnivore.app/me/https-justinjackson-ca-calm-company-18ed5077a18#6eff8816-d2b3-4903-8dd2-8818e9b8344a)  ^6eff8816

