---
id: 0855ba60-fa7b-4e72-af10-90177c2b0203
alias:
  - Welcome to the Age of Technofeudalism | WIRED
title: Welcome to the Age of Technofeudalism | WIRED
author: |
  Morgan Meaker
date: 2024-04-09 12:22:18
url: https://www.wired.com/story/yanis-varoufakis-technofeudalism-interview/
---

# Welcome to the Age of Technofeudalism | WIRED

[Read on Omnivore](https://omnivore.app/me/welcome-to-the-age-of-technofeudalism-wired-18ec298355f)

[Read Original](https://www.wired.com/story/yanis-varoufakis-technofeudalism-interview/)

## Highlights

> **Yanis Varoufakis:** Profit drives capitalism, rent drove feudalism. Now we have moved \[from one system to the other\] because of this new form of super-duper, all-singing, all-dancing capital: cloud capital, algorithmic capital. If I'm right, that is creating new digital fiefdoms like Amazon.com, like Airbnb, where the main mode of wealth extraction comes in the form not of profit but of rent.
> 
> Take the Apple Store. You are producing an app, Apple can withhold 30 percent of your profits \[through a commission fee\]. That's a rent. That's like a ground rent. It's a bit like the Apple Store is a fiefdom. It's a cloud fiefdom, and Apple extracts a rent exactly as in feudalism. So my argument is not that we went back from capitalism to feudalism. My argument is that we have progressed forward to a new system, which has many of the characteristics of feudalism, but it is one step ahead of capitalism. To signal that, I added the word _techno_. [⤴️](https://omnivore.app/me/welcome-to-the-age-of-technofeudalism-wired-18ec298355f#220d0f22-89e4-46b0-8a94-97995951fea5)  ^220d0f22

> **I understand technofeudalism as affecting three groups of people. Can we boil down who is affected into these groups?**
> 
> Yes, and I've given them names. The company that produces the electric bicycles sold on Alibaba or Amazon.com, this is a vassal capitalist. Most of the profit margin for that company is skimmed off by Jeff Bezos \[Amazon’s founder and executive chairman\] in the form of cloud rent.
> 
> Second is cloud proles, or cloud proletarians. Look at the workers in Amazon warehouses who are monitored by algorithms.
> 
> And the third one is you and me. I call us cloud serfs. Because the parallel with the serfs is that we _volunteer_ free labor. It doesn't matter whether we're enjoying it or not. Every time you upload a video on Tiktok, on Facebook, on Instagram, you're adding to the capital stock of these companies. We are adding to it directly through our labor or our movement or our existence. In that way we're serfs, but we are more than serfs, we’re cloud serfs producing capital. And that has never happened in the history of the world. [⤴️](https://omnivore.app/me/welcome-to-the-age-of-technofeudalism-wired-18ec298355f#bb8dbad7-b2cd-42ba-88dd-462e7c2321f1)  ^bb8dbad7

