---
id: dc09076a-9c66-4227-8458-edb659c41e20
alias:
  - Write for others but mostly for yourself — Jack Vanlightly
title: "Write for others but mostly for yourself — Jack Vanlightly"
author: |
  Jack Vanlightly
date: 2024-03-14 07:07:52
url: https://jack-vanlightly.com/blog/2022/1/25/write-for-others-but-mostly-for-yourself
---

# Write for others but mostly for yourself — Jack Vanlightly

[Read on Omnivore](https://omnivore.app/me/write-for-others-but-mostly-for-yourself-jack-vanlightly-18e3bc9e98f)

[Read Original](https://jack-vanlightly.com/blog/2022/1/25/write-for-others-but-mostly-for-yourself)

## Highlights

> I cared about my reputation and about my potential readers and so embarking on writing a blog post about a technical subject ended up involving a huge amount of work. I knew that if I wasn’t careful or was indeed careless about what I wrote I’d not only be wasting people’s time but I could be publicly ridiculed on the internet. So I only wrote about things that I had a fundamental understanding of or set about getting that deep understanding that I lacked first. [⤴️](https://omnivore.app/me/write-for-others-but-mostly-for-yourself-jack-vanlightly-18e3bc9e98f#7775e328-70d1-488f-ad55-86aa1ea269e1)  ^7775e328

> The great thing about writing is that it uncovers all these areas that you thought you understood but don’t. This is especially true when you know that competent and knowledgeable people are going to read it. You start explaining something in detail, about how it works, what the trade-offs are, the alternatives and so on and very soon your internal BS detector is going off. It’s yelling “How do you know that!?” and “What evidence do you have for this statement!?”. You realize that your knowledge is based on shaky foundations and your words are worthless. So you set out to learn the missing pieces, search for the insights and fundamental truths so that you can explain all this stuff with authenticity.
> 
> When you write regularly and face-off against this internal BS detector you either level up or go home. Writing forced me to learn things to a higher standard like nothing else. [⤴️](https://omnivore.app/me/write-for-others-but-mostly-for-yourself-jack-vanlightly-18e3bc9e98f#d56297ce-7de2-4360-bde5-f973db2aaeb1)  ^d56297ce

> Because I do share it with people I get that automatic BS detection in my head that tells me when my thinking is sloppy or on shaky ground. It also forces me to flesh out the idea, consider all its trade-offs. Sometimes it ends up being generally applicable enough that I can actually publish it. [⤴️](https://omnivore.app/me/write-for-others-but-mostly-for-yourself-jack-vanlightly-18e3bc9e98f#dd9288ba-91cd-4d66-82d2-519d20023be7)  ^dd9288ba

