---
id: 88ce5fa6-58d3-4f30-a5a1-c8ce7387159c
alias:
  - "Q&A: How refusal can be an act of design | MIT News | Massachusetts Institute of Technology"
title: "Q&A: How refusal can be an act of design | MIT News | Massachusetts Institute of Technology"
author: |
  Adelaide Zollinger | MIT Morningside Academy for Design
date: 2024-03-27 10:09:56
url: https://news.mit.edu/2024/how-refusal-can-be-an-act-of-design-jonathan-zong-0325
created: 2024-03-29
modified: 2024-04-21
---

# Q&A: How refusal can be an act of design | MIT News | Massachusetts Institute of Technology

[Read on Omnivore](https://omnivore.app/me/q-a-how-refusal-can-be-an-act-of-design-mit-news-massachusetts-i-18e7f63478f)

[Read Original](https://news.mit.edu/2024/how-refusal-can-be-an-act-of-design-jonathan-zong-0325)

## Highlights

> But when it comes to data privacy, simply making choices available is not enough. Choices can be unequally available, or create no-win situations where all options are bad. This led me to the concept of refusal: questioning the authority of data collectors and challenging their legitimacy. [⤴️](https://omnivore.app/me/q-a-how-refusal-can-be-an-act-of-design-mit-news-massachusetts-i-18e7f63478f#46b72656-50c7-4e61-a3fa-96661a09faa1)  ^46b72656

> The key idea of my work is that refusal is an act of design. I think of refusal as deliberate actions to redesign our socio-technical landscape by exerting some sort of influence. Like design, refusal is generative. Like design, it's oriented towards creating alternate possibilities and alternate futures. Design is a process of exploring or traversing a space of possibility. Applying a design framework to cases of refusal drawn from scholarly and journalistic sources allowed me to establish a common language for talking about refusal and to imagine refusals that haven’t been explored yet. [⤴️](https://omnivore.app/me/q-a-how-refusal-can-be-an-act-of-design-mit-news-massachusetts-i-18e7f63478f#6aa69b6e-034d-4f96-86c6-412a567daac8)  ^6aa69b6e

> People who are affected by technologies are not always included in the design process for those technologies. Refusal then becomes a meaningful expression of values and priorities for those who were not part of the early design conversations. Actions taken against technologies like face surveillance — be it legal battles against companies, advocacy for stricter regulations, or even direct action like disabling security cameras — may not fit the conventional notion of participating in a design process. And yet, these are the actions available to refusers who may be excluded from other forms of participation. [⤴️](https://omnivore.app/me/q-a-how-refusal-can-be-an-act-of-design-mit-news-massachusetts-i-18e7f63478f#9b649bac-24ac-4f8d-93d5-ee2e8bf940e9)  ^9b649bac

> Refusal is not merely a negation, but a pathway to different futures. [⤴️](https://omnivore.app/me/q-a-how-refusal-can-be-an-act-of-design-mit-news-massachusetts-i-18e7f63478f#cbe4e63a-8ff5-4f76-905e-e3e8bfb43197)  ^cbe4e63a

> Refusals vary widely across contexts and scales. Developing a framework for refusal is about helping people see actions that are seemingly very different as instances of the same broader idea. Our framework consists of four facets: autonomy, time, power, and cost.
> 
> Consider the case of IBM creating a facial recognition dataset [using people's photos without consent](https://www.bbc.com/news/technology-47555216). We saw multiple forms of refusal emerge in response. IBM allowed individuals to opt out by withdrawing their photos. People collectively refused by creating a class-action lawsuit against IBM. Around the same time, many U.S. cities started passing local legislation banning the government use of facial recognition. Evaluating these cases through the framework highlights commonalities and differences. The framework highlights varied approaches to autonomy, like individual opt-out and collective action. Regarding time, opt-outs and lawsuits react to past harm, while legislation might proactively prevent future harm. Power dynamics differ; withdrawing individual photos minimally influences IBM, while legislation could potentially cause longer-term change. And as for cost, individual opt-out seems less demanding, while other approaches require more time and effort, balanced against potential benefits. [⤴️](https://omnivore.app/me/q-a-how-refusal-can-be-an-act-of-design-mit-news-massachusetts-i-18e7f63478f#70841cea-375c-4e9e-a29c-d68105d81420)  ^70841cea

> Taking a socio-technical perspective, the act of designing encompasses software, institutions, relationships, and governance structures surrounding data use. I want people who aren’t software engineers, like policymakers or activists, to view themselves as integral to the technology design process. [⤴️](https://omnivore.app/me/q-a-how-refusal-can-be-an-act-of-design-mit-news-massachusetts-i-18e7f63478f#3ec19643-0f8a-43e2-b946-95c375bd53c1)  ^3ec19643

