---
id: f7aa2a43-153c-4df5-b967-ebf52b275c28
alias:
  - "Refuting Bloomberg's analysis: ChatGPT isn't racist. But it is bad at recruiting."
title: "Refuting Bloomberg's analysis: ChatGPT isn't racist. But it is bad at recruiting."
author: |
  Aline Lerner
date: 2024-04-16 22:04:38
url: https://interviewing.io/blog/refuting-bloombergs-analysis-chatgpt-isnt-racist
---

# Refuting Bloomberg's analysis: ChatGPT isn't racist. But it is bad at recruiting.

[Read on Omnivore](https://omnivore.app/me/https-interviewing-io-blog-refuting-bloombergs-analysis-chatgpt--18ee8b9cdb4)

[Read Original](https://interviewing.io/blog/refuting-bloombergs-analysis-chatgpt-isnt-racist)

## Highlights

> It looks like the same thing happened to ChatGPT, at least in part. We went back and looked at how ChatGPT treated candidates with top-tier schools on their LinkedIn profiles vs. those without. It turns out that ChatGPT consistently overestimates the passing rate of engineers with top schools and top companies on their resumes. We also saw that ChatGPT consistently underestimates the performance of candidates without those elite “credentials” on their resumes. [⤴️](https://omnivore.app/me/https-interviewing-io-blog-refuting-bloombergs-analysis-chatgpt--18ee8b9cdb4#1e509108-3c0e-4487-8a14-7299791f2df2)  ^1e509108

> That decision is rational — in the absence of a better signal, you have to use proxies, and those proxies seem as good as any. Unfortunately, as you can see from these results (and from other studies we’ve done in the past; see the footnote for the full list[5](#user-content-fn-5)), it’s not particularly accurate… and it’s definitely not accurate enough to codify into our AI tools. [⤴️](https://omnivore.app/me/https-interviewing-io-blog-refuting-bloombergs-analysis-chatgpt--18ee8b9cdb4#3e7b8e8e-d755-43e2-8e47-94f58f717d12)  ^3e7b8e8e

> Unfortunately, most, if not all, of the AI tools and systems that claim to help recruiters make better decisions do not have this kind of data and are 1) either built on top of GPT (or one of its analogs) without fine-tuning or 2) are glorified keyword matchers masquerading as AI, or both.
> 
> Though human recruiters aren’t particularly good at judging resumes, and though we, as a society, don’t yet have a great solution to the problem of effective candidate filtering, it’s clear that off-the-shelf AI solutions are not the magic pill we’re looking for — they’re flawed in the same ways as humans. They just do the wrong thing faster and at scale. [⤴️](https://omnivore.app/me/https-interviewing-io-blog-refuting-bloombergs-analysis-chatgpt--18ee8b9cdb4#6636e8b7-175f-4286-a204-08f4b1cc5ecb)  ^6636e8b7

