---
id: a92c5b2a-c486-11ee-8ccf-1373e1f5d105
alias:
  - "Gates' Law: How Progress Compounds and Why It Matters"
title: "Gates' Law: How Progress Compounds and Why It Matters"
author: |
  Farnam Street
date: 2024-02-06 07:59:38
url: https://fs.blog/gates-law/
created: 2024-03-02
modified: 2024-05-05
---

# Gates' Law: How Progress Compounds and Why It Matters

[Read on Omnivore](https://omnivore.app/me/gates-law-how-progress-compounds-and-why-it-matters-18d7bd10a68)

[Read Original](https://fs.blog/gates-law/)

## Highlights

> **New technology:** The media picks up on the existence of a new technology which may not exist in a usable form yet. Nonetheless, the publicity leads to significant interest. At this point, people working on research and development are probably not making any money from it. Lots of mistakes are made. In Everett Rogers’s diffusion of innovations theory, this is known as the innovation stage. If it seems like something new will have a dramatic payoff, it probably won’t last. If it seems we have found the perfect use for a brand-new technology, we may be wrong. [⤴️](https://omnivore.app/me/gates-law-how-progress-compounds-and-why-it-matters-18d7bd10a68#6bd511e9-36e2-4f40-9741-f40c795841ad)  ^6bd511e9

> **The peak of inflated expectations:** A few well-publicized success stories lead to inflated expectations. Hype builds and new companies pop up to anticipate the demand. There may be a burst of funding for research and development. Scammers looking to make a quick buck may move into the area. Rogers calls this the syndication stage. It’s here that we overestimate the future applications and impact of the technology. [⤴️](https://omnivore.app/me/gates-law-how-progress-compounds-and-why-it-matters-18d7bd10a68#b68fc64b-4266-4ccc-b455-f7ef60a888cc)  ^b68fc64b

> **The trough of disillusionment:** Prominent failures or a lack of progress break through the hype and lead to disillusionment. People become pessimistic about technology’s potential and mostly lose interest. Reports of scams may contribute to this, as the media uses this as a reason to describe the technology as a fraud. If it seems like new technology is dying, it may just be that its public perception has changed and the technology itself is still developing. Hype does not correlate directly with functionality. [⤴️](https://omnivore.app/me/gates-law-how-progress-compounds-and-why-it-matters-18d7bd10a68#b8d7ac24-78ac-4e63-a010-0993b3d69452)  ^b8d7ac24

> **The slope of enlightenment:** As time passes, people continue to improve technology and find better uses for it. Eventually, it’s clear how it can improve our lives, and mainstream adoption begins. Mechanisms for preventing scams or lawbreaking emerge. [⤴️](https://omnivore.app/me/gates-law-how-progress-compounds-and-why-it-matters-18d7bd10a68#b8422695-6c95-49c1-94f3-a78b781e9878)  ^b8422695

> **The plateau of productivity:** The technology becomes mainstream. Development slows. It becomes part of our lives and ceases to seem novel. Those who move into the now saturated market tend to struggle, as a few dominant players take the lion’s share of the available profits. Rogers calls this the diffusion stage. [⤴️](https://omnivore.app/me/gates-law-how-progress-compounds-and-why-it-matters-18d7bd10a68#92637e37-8912-446f-972a-804941325410)  ^92637e37

> Hype serves a real purpose in the early days: it draws interest, secures funding, attracts people with the right talents to move things forward and generates new ideas. Not all hype is equally important, because not all opinions are equally important. If there’s intense interest within a niche group with relevant expertise, that’s more telling than a general enthusiasm. [⤴️](https://omnivore.app/me/gates-law-how-progress-compounds-and-why-it-matters-18d7bd10a68#a50d1653-e102-4711-bf9b-8afd6290486c)  ^a50d1653

> This happens in our lives, as well. If you learn a new skill, the number of skills you could potentially learn increases because some elements may be transferable. If you are introduced to a new person, the number of people you could meet grows, because they may introduce you to others. If you start learning a language, native speakers may be more willing to have conversations with you in it, meaning you can get a broader understanding. If you read a new book, you may find it easier to read other books by linking together the information in them. The list is endless. We can’t imagine what we’re capable of achieving in ten years because we forget about the adjacent possibilities that will emerge. [⤴️](https://omnivore.app/me/gates-law-how-progress-compounds-and-why-it-matters-18d7bd10a68#55df378a-bfc6-4a50-a856-558172364539)  ^55df378a

> As Stephen Hawking put it in 1993:
> 
> > For millions of years, mankind lived just like the animals. Then something happened which unleashed the power of our imagination. We learned to talk and we learned to listen. Speech has allowed the communication of ideas, enabling human beings to work together to build the impossible. Mankind’s greatest achievements have come about by talking, and its greatest failures by not talking. It doesn’t have to be like this. Our greatest hopes could become reality in the future. With the technology at our disposal, the possibilities are unbounded. All we need to do is make sure we keep talking. [⤴️](https://omnivore.app/me/gates-law-how-progress-compounds-and-why-it-matters-18d7bd10a68#3c368ebe-0c4c-4d6a-ad79-1013953b7a09)  ^3c368ebe

