---
id: 0c07e4e0-4733-4ae0-984e-881f81d11476
alias:
  - Advice to Young People, The Lies I Tell Myself - jxnl.co
title: "Advice to Young People, The Lies I Tell Myself - jxnl.co"
author: |
  Jason Liu
date: 2024-04-15 07:52:12
url: https://jxnl.co/writing/2024/06/01/advice-to-young-people/
created: 2024-05-06
modified: 2024-05-06
---

# Advice to Young People, The Lies I Tell Myself - jxnl.co

[Read on Omnivore](https://omnivore.app/me/https-jxnl-co-writing-2024-06-01-advice-to-young-people-18ee0870ae7)

[Read Original](https://jxnl.co/writing/2024/06/01/advice-to-young-people/)

## Highlights

> Choosing can be terrifying because it means we are accountable for our decisions, and there are infinite options before us. It is also frightening because once we have made a decision, we must live with it, it is the death of optionality. But I believe that choosing is the only way to live authentically. [⤴️](https://omnivore.app/me/https-jxnl-co-writing-2024-06-01-advice-to-young-people-18ee0870ae7#ae558ce6-0c74-477e-bf90-c354318e4bfb)  ^ae558ce6

> But if you want to get a job, "man, you're great to be around" is a very strong metric. This is obviously conditional on skill, and you should obviously focus on skills acquisition. [⤴️](https://omnivore.app/me/https-jxnl-co-writing-2024-06-01-advice-to-young-people-18ee0870ae7#c3c941f0-01b0-48a1-bb62-3de8a5698013)  ^c3c941f0

> And just like there is an off-season and on-season for sports, I think there's an off-season and on-season for learning. And I think that's the most important thing to understand.
> 
> At some point, cardio will hurt your strength gains. At some point, strength gains will hurt your cardio. At some point, you're gonna have to choose between being a powerlifter or a marathon runner. And that's okay. You can always come back to it. But I think the most important thing is to understand that you can't be good at everything all the time. And that's okay. You can always come back to it. [⤴️](https://omnivore.app/me/https-jxnl-co-writing-2024-06-01-advice-to-young-people-18ee0870ae7#fe7d8995-10d8-4059-b3b5-6a8e68d7bebd)  ^fe7d8995

> By the time I got on stage, the words just flowed out of me. I had rehearsed the speech standing up, wearing the same jacket, about 20 times in the past month. I knew I could do it because I had already done it.
> 
> In order to keep doing the reps in the past 3 months I've been relentlessly trying to find podcasts to speak on to keep doing the reps and practicing. [⤴️](https://omnivore.app/me/https-jxnl-co-writing-2024-06-01-advice-to-young-people-18ee0870ae7#23bb89f3-8158-4e8f-ae8a-ce207568df19)  ^23bb89f3

> In the short term, you would be much happier if you accepted and admitted to yourself that the reason you don't have what you want is simply because you do not want it badly enough. The sooner you accept that, the happier you'll be. Then the next question is: Do you want to be happy or do you want to achieve what you want? It's not the last question, but it definitely is the next question. [⤴️](https://omnivore.app/me/https-jxnl-co-writing-2024-06-01-advice-to-young-people-18ee0870ae7#abdd92e1-2860-4bfe-9fd2-809730c271e1)  ^abdd92e1

> You are simply the person who created the work. You are a vessel, a medium for the work, but you are not the work itself.
> 
> The sooner you realize this, the easier it will be to share the work you have produced, receive feedback, develop your skills, and reflect on your taste. [⤴️](https://omnivore.app/me/https-jxnl-co-writing-2024-06-01-advice-to-young-people-18ee0870ae7#9ff0cf24-a3d3-4907-a692-a2f4e55305a7)  ^9ff0cf24

> It might be easy to convince myself that a good father is able to take care of the family, but how many times was that an excuse to just work yourself to death is the father who can pay for piano lessons, truly a better man than the father, who can be present at the recital? I just don't think this is something that we can turn on and off so easily. [⤴️](https://omnivore.app/me/https-jxnl-co-writing-2024-06-01-advice-to-young-people-18ee0870ae7#3f240cef-173e-42c0-b63e-216b797bc949)  ^3f240cef

> It is crucial to start practicing self-love. While successful people may attribute their success to their struggles, I believe a significant part of it is simply coming to terms with those struggles. Each person's pain is maximum to them. You have already endured hardships. Seek success because you deserve it and learn to love yourself, rather than punishing yourself for not being good enough. [⤴️](https://omnivore.app/me/https-jxnl-co-writing-2024-06-01-advice-to-young-people-18ee0870ae7#582e7e65-b125-436f-9136-ed65253c6866)  ^582e7e65

> Instead, I now use inverted thinking. What would I do if I really hated myself? What if I wanted myself to lose out as much as possible? What would I do?
> 
> * Stay home all day.
> * If my friends don't ask to hang out, don't reach out to them out of fear of rejection.
> * Don't ask the girl out.
> * Never learn to talk to strangers.
> * Work hard and make tons of money but die an unhappy old man with regrets.
> * Neglect my health and my body.
> * Never learn to cook.
> * Be afraid to dance in public.
> * Make excuses and believe other people are more talented than me.
> * Never look at how far I've come and only focus on what I don't have.
> 
> Whatever it is, just do the opposite. [⤴️](https://omnivore.app/me/https-jxnl-co-writing-2024-06-01-advice-to-young-people-18ee0870ae7#c9b36067-fd15-430e-bb52-da3188071888)  ^c9b36067

> Looking back at that time, I had so much judgment of others, but it was really just a reflection of my own judgment of myself. I was so afraid of being judged, but I was the one judging myself the most.
> 
> Fast forward 5 years, everyone I see coming into the gym is trying to improve their health. I don't think the same way. I look at these people and think, "Wow, they are so much braver than me. I see them coming consistently, and I can see they are getting results. Good for them! Oh, wow, they are bringing their friends. Awesome."
> 
> The world looks different when you fix your own perception. [⤴️](https://omnivore.app/me/https-jxnl-co-writing-2024-06-01-advice-to-young-people-18ee0870ae7#f80ad031-c8f5-4287-8f5d-a812a7cb0150)  ^f80ad031

> You impress nobody except yourself when you're a pessimist. It doesn't make you a better friend. It does not make you cool and edgy. It does not make you seem smarter just because you can be critical of everything. The world is neither inherently against you nor for you, so believing one or the other is in bad faith. [⤴️](https://omnivore.app/me/https-jxnl-co-writing-2024-06-01-advice-to-young-people-18ee0870ae7#239e334e-3c68-428e-95b3-c608f76a66f0)  ^239e334e

> I looked at all the stupid things I had done in the past, and all the things that happened to me that I didn't understand. Then someone said to me "you were just a child" and it was honestly the most liberating thing I've ever heard. I was just a child. I didn't know any better. I didn't know.
> 
> > You suffered for no reason. You were just a child.
> 
> Now, you also have to realize that this applies to everyone else too. Its everyone's first time being a person, including your parents. [⤴️](https://omnivore.app/me/https-jxnl-co-writing-2024-06-01-advice-to-young-people-18ee0870ae7#7bc8f949-4984-4939-98c5-69584d5a85a7)  ^7bc8f949

