---
id: b0f240f1-183e-434a-9819-ebd0a86be7a7
alias:
  - "More than calculators: Why large language models threaten learning, teaching, and education | by Amy J. Ko | Bits and Behavior | Dec, 2023 | Medium"
title: "More than calculators: Why large language models threaten learning, teaching, and education | by Amy J. Ko | Bits and Behavior | Dec, 2023 | Medium"
author: |
  Amy J. Ko
date: 2024-02-08 08:24:41
url: https://medium.com/bits-and-behavior/more-than-calculators-why-large-language-models-threaten-public-education-480dd5300939
created: 2024-03-02
modified: 2024-05-05
---

# More than calculators: Why large language models threaten learning, teaching, and education | by Amy J. Ko | Bits and Behavior | Dec, 2023 | Medium

[Read on Omnivore](https://omnivore.app/me/more-than-calculators-why-large-language-models-threaten-learnin-18d87d1a884)

[Read Original](https://medium.com/bits-and-behavior/more-than-calculators-why-large-language-models-threaten-public-education-480dd5300939)

## Highlights

> So when we talk about “likely sequences of symbols”, the word “likely” means “the collective writing of mostly English-fluent adults likely to write publicly online in the past decade”, not “all of human knowledge or thought”. [⤴️](https://omnivore.app/me/more-than-calculators-why-large-language-models-threaten-learnin-18d87d1a884#b2315389-c383-496a-b793-a24fe8769b49)  ^b2315389

> The most problematic aspect of this scenario is that _comprehending an explanation of a solution_ is not the same skill as _finding a solution_. The student, without anyone knowing, shifted the task from one of learning to solve algebra problems to one of reading comprehension. They are not learning algebra problem solving, they are learning to read and evaluate algebra solutions. If they will only ever encounter problems that LLMs can answer, and they will always have an LLM, and LLMs will always generate right answers, then may be this is fine. That position essentially posits that because LLMs exist, humans knowing algebra does not matter. But this is a lot of ifs, and so more likely, the student will encounter problems they _haven’t_ encountered and they won’t be able to describe them to an LLM, because they don’t know algebra. In the same way that we have watched human ability to navigate [decline](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhcs.2018.04.006) as GPS has become ubiquitous. [⤴️](https://omnivore.app/me/more-than-calculators-why-large-language-models-threaten-learnin-18d87d1a884#90634fc9-b999-4d9e-b732-acaefe61a29a)  ^90634fc9

> The hype machine has readily deceived educators and education leaders into thinking that LLMs are some kind of intelligent education aid, when in fact, they are just generating likely things that other educators have posted online, whether they are good or not. [⤴️](https://omnivore.app/me/more-than-calculators-why-large-language-models-threaten-learnin-18d87d1a884#508b383d-8479-471f-adfc-23688e5f7ad5)  ^508b383d

> LLMs, however, within the context of schools, _are_ supplanting thought. They are short circuiting students’ opportunities to write, synthesize, reason, and struggle by perfectly reinforcing a vision that equates learning with correct answers. [⤴️](https://omnivore.app/me/more-than-calculators-why-large-language-models-threaten-learnin-18d87d1a884#371d3655-bd69-489b-a82f-e7acc1871e06)  ^371d3655

> I see this in the way that teachers and education leaders are eagerly trying to integrate LLMs into learning, with the false hope that they will help them overcome resource scarcity and finally address inequities by giving every learner access to a personal teacher. Of course, it will not. Instead, LLMs will accelerate the collapse public education in the U.S., by amplifying these existing forces that were already taking us there. [⤴️](https://omnivore.app/me/more-than-calculators-why-large-language-models-threaten-learnin-18d87d1a884#49c05f7d-747e-42c6-aaa3-51e792d87706)  ^49c05f7d

> schools, as they often work today, do not actually incentivize learning and there is no use or disuse of LLMs that can change this. Putting our attention on LLMs, therefore, is mostly a distraction. We should be focused on how to change teaching and learning so that LLMs and all of the other technological distractions that have dominated youth attention are simply irrelevant. [⤴️](https://omnivore.app/me/more-than-calculators-why-large-language-models-threaten-learnin-18d87d1a884#419cd64f-97bc-4c40-8b1c-033379d241ea)  ^419cd64f

> In a way, this broader oppressive political vision of schools mirrors the underlying philosophy of an LLM: the only things that can be said are that which has been said before by our collective definition of “normal,” and at the expense of anyone on the margins. [⤴️](https://omnivore.app/me/more-than-calculators-why-large-language-models-threaten-learnin-18d87d1a884#11f9a24b-ca02-4dfa-87b7-827bba5dd77f)  ^11f9a24b

