---
id: 62b89125-0248-4ff5-a810-0a52db4379eb
alias:
  - The Pile is a 825 GiB diverse, open-source language modelling data set (2020) | Hacker News
title: "The Pile is a 825 GiB diverse, open-source language modelling data set (2020) | Hacker News"
date: 2024-03-09 14:46:51
url: https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=39631516
created: 2024-03-09
modified: 2024-05-05
---

# The Pile is a 825 GiB diverse, open-source language modelling data set (2020) | Hacker News

[Read on Omnivore](https://omnivore.app/me/the-pile-is-a-825-gi-b-diverse-open-source-language-modelling-da-18e1d45a1fa)

[Read Original](https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=39631516)

## Highlights

> I raised a concern about the inclusion of books3 in the Pile back in 2020, and this is what the head of Eleuther (Stella Biderman) told me:
> "So here’s the big picture. There are three sets of datasets:
> 1. Data exists out there in the world. It has been collected into datasets and posted online. I’ll call this raw data.
> 2. We take that data, clean it, and process it for language modeling.  I’ll call this per-set data.
> 3. We combine those per-set data into one massive dataset, the Pile. This is heavily processed, including weighing the components.
> We created 2 and 3 and put them online. We put 2 online so that people can reweigh and remix the data if they wish, but we expect most people to just download 3 and use it out of the box. Access to 3 will be provided in several forms, including HuggingFace and from our website.
> 2 and 3 are not copyright violations, even if the data is copyrighted, because they fall under fair use (at least in the US).
> The Pile contains code that turns 1 into 2 and code that turns 2 into 3.
> When you download Maroon 5 from a website, you are creating a dataset corresponding to 2. That can be copyright violation depending on what you do with it, but our use is not a copyright violation."
>                [⤴️](https://omnivore.app/me/the-pile-is-a-825-gi-b-diverse-open-source-language-modelling-da-18e1d45a1fa#e7686492-edf6-4e83-a11f-a5a22f59e7aa)  ^e7686492

