---
id: 2d3e320e-da1a-4f95-9b3e-61efabd13886
alias:
  - Never struggle to give feedback again (even to your manager)
title: "Never struggle to give feedback again (even to your manager)"
author: |
  Jordan Cutler
date: 2024-04-21 21:56:13
url: https://read.highgrowthengineer.com/p/never-struggle-to-give-feedback-again
created: 2024-05-04
modified: 2024-05-05
---

# Never struggle to give feedback again (even to your manager)

[Read on Omnivore](https://omnivore.app/me/https-read-highgrowthengineer-com-p-never-struggle-to-give-feedb-18f0271eafe)

[Read Original](https://read.highgrowthengineer.com/p/never-struggle-to-give-feedback-again)

## Highlights

> When someone does something great, like a presentation, shipping a new project, or solving a difficult bug, I send them praise directly. This further builds a relationship and again, shows that I am on their side. Because I’ve shared positive feedback, they are more open to hearing me out when I have constructive feedback. They know I care about them and I’m just trying to help. [⤴️](https://omnivore.app/me/https-read-highgrowthengineer-com-p-never-struggle-to-give-feedb-18f0271eafe#2e502387-e006-4073-8e23-d7c3e75fa3e8)  ^2e502387

> Before giving feedback, put yourself in that **“caring mindset.”** What would someone who cares about the other person do? How would they say things?
>
> One thing you can do is tell them that!
>
> In the past, I’ve said this when giving feedback to my manager at the time:
>
> > ✅ Good: _“I want you to know I’m sharing this feedback because I care about us having the best working relationship possible.”_
>
> This helps defuse the situation before it even starts. Again, it’s all about ensuring the other person knows **you are on their side.** [⤴️](https://omnivore.app/me/https-read-highgrowthengineer-com-p-never-struggle-to-give-feedb-18f0271eafe#55a8222c-7c1c-4073-b1de-757e7ff47425)  ^55a8222c

> Putting it together, it might look like:
>
> > ✅ Good: _“For most of the deck, this wasn’t an issue and I thought the slides looked great. These ones though were particularly difficult to read. **One idea could be to include an image and use fewer words on those slides so it matches the other ones. What do you think?**”_
>
> For the suggestion, I like to use [empathizing words](https://read.highgrowthengineer.com/i/143241958/empathizing-words-prescriptive-words) and softer language like “One idea could be” rather than “You should do .” My suggestion is just **one idea** rather than the way they have to do it. They might even have a better idea.
>
> ##  [⤴️](https://omnivore.app/me/https-read-highgrowthengineer-com-p-never-struggle-to-give-feedb-18f0271eafe#573d472d-99c7-40a8-92d5-758bd18d77b2)  ^573d472d

> **Way before giving feedback…**
>
> 1. **Build a relationship with the other person -** This starts the path of giving feedback to someone like it’s your close friend. Good relationship = easy feedback.
> 2. **Share that you are open to receiving feedback -** This results in the other person seeing you are growth-minded and often leads to them asking for feedback too.
> 3. **Give positive feedback first -** This helps build a positive relationship and ensures the other person knows you are on their side and looking out for them. [⤴️](https://omnivore.app/me/https-read-highgrowthengineer-com-p-never-struggle-to-give-feedb-18f0271eafe#81af1666-e6fa-4296-ab94-54c001c47762)  ^81af1666

> **When you do need to give feedback, follow the feedback process…**
>
> 1. **Look inward first. Know your intent -** Ensure you are sharing the feedback for the right reason. Not to vent, but to help the other person.
> 2. **Get permission -** When in doubt, confirm with the other person. This allows them to **opt in** and prevents backlash.
> 3. **Show you care -** The most important step. Let them know the reason you are sharing is because you care.
> 4. **State your observations -** Stick to the facts of the situation. These should hardly be debatable. Call out the common problem.
> 5. **Explain the impact -** Help the other person understand why it matters. Is it impacting you, others, or the business?
> 6. **Get their thoughts -** You’re solving a problem together. Get their take on it.
> 7. **Align on next steps -** Ensure it’s clear what to do moving forward. [⤴️](https://omnivore.app/me/https-read-highgrowthengineer-com-p-never-struggle-to-give-feedb-18f0271eafe#03143f99-5652-4a60-8592-be75a6317ec5)  ^03143f99