---
id: b31dc4b1-4f3c-4bc3-b3b4-d785aa3305fb
alias:
  - "Pluralistic: The antitrust case against Apple (22 Mar 2024) – Pluralistic: Daily links from Cory Doctorow"
title: "Pluralistic: The antitrust case against Apple (22 Mar 2024) – Pluralistic: Daily links from Cory Doctorow"
date: 2024-03-22 17:07:57
url: https://pluralistic.net/2024/03/22/reality-distortion-field/
created: 2024-03-23
modified: 2024-04-21
---

# Pluralistic: The antitrust case against Apple (22 Mar 2024) – Pluralistic: Daily links from Cory Doctorow

[Read on Omnivore](https://omnivore.app/me/https-pluralistic-net-2024-03-22-reality-distortion-field-18e67222308)

[Read Original](https://pluralistic.net/2024/03/22/reality-distortion-field/)

## Highlights

> The keyword here is _external_ threats. When Apple itself threatens your privacy, the fortress becomes a prison. The fact that you can't install unapproved apps on your Ios device means that when Apple decides to harm you, you have nowhere to turn. The first Apple customers to discover this were in China. When the Chinese government ordered Apple to remove all working privacy tools from its App Store, the company obliged, rather than risk losing access to its ultra-cheap manufacturing base [⤴️](https://omnivore.app/me/https-pluralistic-net-2024-03-22-reality-distortion-field-18e67222308#8997ede8-4559-4a7e-a755-0e3f4a90619d)  ^8997ede8

> Apple wraps itself in a cloak of privacy, security, and consumer preferences to justify its anticompetitive conduct. Indeed, it spends billions on marketing and branding to promote the self-serving premise that only Apple can safeguard consumers’ privacy and security interests. Apple selectively compromises privacy and security interests when doing so is in Apple’s own financial interest—such as degrading the security of text messages, offering governments and certain companies the chance to access more private and secure versions of app stores, or accepting billions of dollars each year for choosing Google as its default search engine when more private options are available. In the end, Apple deploys privacy and security justifications as an elastic shield that can stretch or contract to serve Apple’s financial and business interests. [⤴️](https://omnivore.app/me/https-pluralistic-net-2024-03-22-reality-distortion-field-18e67222308#054e8e30-8168-44dd-b0e4-c151c05e3af3)  ^054e8e30

