---
id: 7d045ef3-a76f-4da1-82c3-671112b640bd
alias:
  - How to Quickly Get to the Important Truth Inside Any Privacy Policy – The Markup
title: How to Quickly Get to the Important Truth Inside Any Privacy Policy – The Markup
author: |
  Jon Keegan and Jesse Woo
date: 2024-02-02 22:36:01
url: https://themarkup.org/the-breakdown/2023/08/03/how-to-quickly-get-to-the-important-truth-inside-any-privacy-policy
---

# How to Quickly Get to the Important Truth Inside Any Privacy Policy – The Markup

[Read on Omnivore](https://omnivore.app/me/how-to-quickly-get-to-the-important-truth-inside-any-privacy-pol-18d6bf6edf3)
[Read Original](https://themarkup.org/the-breakdown/2023/08/03/how-to-quickly-get-to-the-important-truth-inside-any-privacy-policy)

## Highlights

> But the privacy policy is one of the only places where tech companies have to tell us the truth—the truth about what personal data they are collecting, how they share and profit from that data, and at a deeper level, what sort of trade we’re making when we choose to use their apps or platforms. [⤴️](https://omnivore.app/me/how-to-quickly-get-to-the-important-truth-inside-any-privacy-pol-18d6bf6edf3#0e89445c-a2d1-438f-9329-91f64dd88ca5)  ^0e89445c

> #### Privacy policies usually follow a predictable structure
> 
> * #### Data Collection  
> What specific types of data are being collected and how.
> * #### Data Sharing  
> What data will be shared with third parties, and who those parties are.
> * #### Data Use  
> How your data is used. Could be for advertising, data enrichment, or for providing the service.
> * #### Data Management  
> Details related to data retention, transfers, security, and encryption. [⤴️](https://omnivore.app/me/how-to-quickly-get-to-the-important-truth-inside-any-privacy-pol-18d6bf6edf3#6c13df66-a007-4f17-a958-47835e8df733)  ^6c13df66

> Be on the lookout for hints that the company uses a tracking technique called fingerprinting**,** which can identify you even when you go out of your way to decline cookies or block trackers. It does so based on information about your device such as the operating system, manufacturer, or even screen resolution, so keep an eye out for whether that data is being collected. [⤴️](https://omnivore.app/me/how-to-quickly-get-to-the-important-truth-inside-any-privacy-pol-18d6bf6edf3#be7a96d7-4c15-444e-8e3f-68ec65990d97)  ^be7a96d7

> Calli Schroeder, global privacy counsel at the Electronic Privacy Information Center (EPIC), said to take any examples provided in this section with a big lump of salt. “In many cases, the ‘for example’ will point out a relatively expected or benign use and distract from other more intrusive potential uses. Those other uses wouldn’t violate the Privacy Policy because they never claimed the example was the only use type,” explained Schroeder. [⤴️](https://omnivore.app/me/how-to-quickly-get-to-the-important-truth-inside-any-privacy-pol-18d6bf6edf3#e5312326-cc9d-4c39-9f59-2fb9d9773cf9)  ^e5312326

> But look out for mentions of “business partners.” Do they combine or enrich your data with information collected from other “partners”? This is a red flag that you are being profiled. If you’re really lucky, you might find a policy that actually identifies some of those partners. (These could be advertising firms, data brokers, or affiliates.) And usually if another partner is listed, policies will inform you that you are also subject to the partners’ privacy policies, which it seems you are expected to read. It’s up to you to decide how far down the rabbit hole you want to go. [⤴️](https://omnivore.app/me/how-to-quickly-get-to-the-important-truth-inside-any-privacy-pol-18d6bf6edf3#63b96439-1d0b-4af9-9833-45e8f0806eb7)  ^63b96439

> When a company says it uses your data to “personalize” or “enhance” your experience or “improve our services,” that can often mean it is analyzing your data for ad targeting. [⤴️](https://omnivore.app/me/how-to-quickly-get-to-the-important-truth-inside-any-privacy-pol-18d6bf6edf3#df2e236a-6a1a-4063-873d-f5290772560b)  ^df2e236a

> Depending on where you live (and which privacy laws might apply to you), you may be able to request a copy of your data, correct your data, or ask for it to be deleted. You may even have the option to opt out of having your data shared or sold and still be able to use the service. [⤴️](https://omnivore.app/me/how-to-quickly-get-to-the-important-truth-inside-any-privacy-pol-18d6bf6edf3#3451cd10-e79d-4420-a984-37e9514cfb0c)  ^3451cd10

> Within this section, look for portions that begin with “In the past 12 months,” as in, “In the past 12 months, we have collected the following categories of personal information, as described in the CCPA.” This particular “in the past 12 months” disclosure is really one of the clearest pieces of documentation about what a company is actually doing. [⤴️](https://omnivore.app/me/how-to-quickly-get-to-the-important-truth-inside-any-privacy-pol-18d6bf6edf3#8f5074ee-ce42-463f-a3b2-3fa76b50f5bc)  ^8f5074ee

> What may be happening here is device fingerprinting. All of those signals taken together are unique enough to identify your device. This is a common approach companies have taken to get around ad blockers and other privacy-protecting technologies. [⤴️](https://omnivore.app/me/how-to-quickly-get-to-the-important-truth-inside-any-privacy-pol-18d6bf6edf3#ba929478-65ba-4e60-b977-810d322a6c82)  ^ba929478

