---
aliases:
  - "You Can't Sit With Us: Exclusionary Pedagogy in AI Ethics Education"
authors: "Inioluwa Deborah Raji, Morgan Klaus Scheuerman, Razvan Amironesei"
date: 2023-01-23 14:10:46
tags: []
title: "You Can't Sit With Us: Exclusionary Pedagogy in AI Ethics Education"
url: "https://doi.org/10.1145/3442188.3445914"
---

# You Can't Sit With Us: Exclusionary Pedagogy in AI Ethics Education

## Abstract

Given a growing concern about the lack of ethical consideration in the Artificial Intelligence (AI) field, many have begun to question how dominant approaches to the disciplinary education of computer science (CS)---and its implications for AI---has led to the current "ethics crisis". However, we claim that the current AI ethics education space relies on a form of "exclusionary pedagogy," where ethics is distilled for computational approaches, but there is no deeper epistemological engagement with other ways of knowing that would benefit ethical thinking or an acknowledgement of the limitations of uni-vocal computational thinking. This results in indifference, devaluation, and a lack of mutual support between CS and humanistic social science (HSS), elevating the myth of technologists as "ethical unicorns" that can do it all, though their disciplinary tools are ultimately limited. Through an analysis of computer science education literature and a review of college-level course syllabi in AI ethics, we discuss the limitations of the epistemological assumptions and hierarchies of knowledge which dictate current attempts at including ethics education in CS training and explore evidence for the practical mechanisms through which this exclusion occurs. We then propose a shift towards a substantively collaborative, holistic, and ethically generative pedagogy in AI education.

<mark style="background: #5fb236">However, we claim that the current AI ethics education space relies on a form of “exclusionary pedagogy,” where ethics is distilled for computational approaches, but there is no deeper epistemological engagement with other ways of knowing that would benefit ethical thinking or an acknowledgement of the limitations of uni-vocal computational thinking.</mark> [(p. 1)](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/9FZQV42W?page=1)

<mark style="background: #5fb236">it is becoming clear that proposals anchored to developing individual morality and understanding falls short of resulting in any noticeable changes to the way in which students conduct research and develop applications for deployment once they leave the classroom [35]. This is made even more evident by the consistency with which such crises continue to occur [81].</mark> [(p. 1)](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/9FZQV42W?page=1)

<mark style="background: #5fb236">If anything, to rush CS students through heavily condensed and simplified overviews of broad ethical understanding and then position them to be the primary arbiter of change confuses the situation. This promotes the engineer’s natural inclination towards seeing themselves as a solitary saviour, to the detriment of the quality of the solution and in spite of the need for other disciplinary perspectives.</mark> [(p. 1)](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/9FZQV42W?page=1)

<mark style="background: #5fb236">At its simplest, the technocratic paradigm might be described as an engineering or programmatic approach, which centers the skills to build computer programs; the rationalist paradigm might be described as a mathematically theoretical approach, focusing more heavily on a priori knowledge about the underlying mathematical reality of computer systems; and the scientific paradigm might be best characterized by its focus on empiricism, seeking to more deeply understand the behaviors of computer programs. These three paradigms shape how computer science operates, through enculturation in computer science education and in industry cultures, at both the level of attitudes and values, and at the level of behaviors and practices.</mark> [(p. 2)](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/9FZQV42W?page=2)

<mark style="background: #ff6666">learning computer science has traditionally emphasized mathematical theory and engineering practices. A focus on “programming intelligence” is a well-researched cause of the high dropout rates of computer science undergraduate programs [5, 30, 36, 75]. Computer science is what Clark labels “a hard-applied discipline” [14]. Those who approach computer science problems differently are pushed out of the field, resulting in more homogeneous mindsets and practices within the discipline and unsurprising diversity deficits [49].</mark> [(p. 2)](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/9FZQV42W?page=2)

<mark style="background: #5fb236">In a scathing analysis of the technocratic dominance in computer science education, Washington wrote: “With no formal courses that focus on the non-technical issues affecting marginalized groups and how to address and eradicate them, students are indirectly taught that the current status quo in computing departments and industry is not only acceptable, but also unproblematic” [77].</mark> [(p. 2)](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/9FZQV42W?page=2)

<mark style="background: #5fb236">In other words, he paints computer science education as a funnel from classroom to tech company, with little space for nuanced reflection on its foundational norms and objectives.</mark> [(p. 2)](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/9FZQV42W?page=2)

<mark style="background: #5fb236">ethics courses are being taught from within the discipline [29]from computer scientists to computer scientists. A discipline which has otherwise been criticized for its lack of ethical engagement is now taking up the mantle of instilling ethical wisdom to its next generation of students</mark> [(p. 3)](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/9FZQV42W?page=3)

<mark style="background: #ff6666">Like Eden, one might argue that the technocratic paradigm has dominated computer science, specifically AI, due to industry and monetary incentives driving programmatic approaches where any problem is best addressed by technologists, including the problems they create. More specifically, Agre famously characterized the nature of the conception of “reality” in AI—which posits better systems and better models as the only means of critiquing AI—as problematic in its ignorance and dismissal of sociological or critical theory [1].</mark> [(p. 3)](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/9FZQV42W?page=3)

<mark style="background: #5fb236">Although students are often taught the importance of computational thinking for problem solving, they are rarely exposed to what such thinking can take away from one’s ability to appropriately analyze less familiar challenges, such as this ethics crisis. There are insights that one gains from a computational lens and also insights lost. Being anchored to one perspective for so long as a discipline is a limiting factor and the historical lack of social science training in computer science has given rise to computer science researchers, teachers, and industry practitioners well-versed in techno-solutionist methodologies but not social realities, leading to systems that are—often inadvertently—inaccessible, opaque, unethical, and harmful.</mark> [(p. 3)](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/9FZQV42W?page=3)

<mark style="background: #5fb236">However, the reality is that engineers are often absent or excluded from decisions that lead to harm. These decisions can often be attributed to sales people, executies, marketing and other stakeholders in a corporation—at times without even informing the technologist of the broader context of what they’re working on. Similarly, problematic unethical research practices in the field are mostly enabled by a set of entrenched norms and operational structures of everything from funding to the review process and publication.</mark> [(p. 3)](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/9FZQV42W?page=3)

<mark style="background: #5fb236">A step towards more inclusive design is thus less about a single engineer’s efforts push to enforce their understanding of diverse representation into the worldview of the model, and more about a form of participatory design where these other stakeholders are actively and humbly welcomed to join the engineer in the creation of more just and equitable AI systems.</mark> [(p. 3)](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/9FZQV42W?page=3)

<mark style="background: #5fb236">Furthermore, this solutionist attitude of quick fixes in CS de facto displaces the knowledge of other qualitative oriented educators and researchers. The result is not only a feedback loop within computer science, but a continuing aggregation of disciplinary privilege that seeks to make computer scientists claim both “technical” and “social” expertises, the latter of which they do not actually have in depth.</mark> [(p. 3)](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/9FZQV42W?page=3)

<mark style="background: #5fb236">As danah boyd, a principal researcher at Microsoft, wrote of social science: “Academic disciplines are brutally myopic, judgmental of anyone who chooses to explore a path of inquiry outside of the acceptable boundaries of the field”[11].</mark> [(p. 4)](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/9FZQV42W?page=4)

<mark style="background: #5fb236">However, we have chosen to focus specifically on computer science, and AI, due to its emergent and out-sized power: computer scientists and machine learning engineers are having real world impact, socially, politically, and economically.</mark> [(p. 4)](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/9FZQV42W?page=4)

<mark style="background: #5fb236">Methodological dogmatism is to say that the disciplines don’t value each other, and more specifically, do not value their respective processes for arriving at an accepted conclusion or &quot;truth&quot;.</mark> [(p. 4)](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/9FZQV42W?page=4)

<mark style="background: #5fb236">The other mechanism of exclusion evident in this space is that of a lack of effort to engage in interdisciplinary translation. This is to say that there is an apparent acceptance that the disciplines don’t talk to each other, and effectively tend to not communicate across disciplinary lines.</mark> [(p. 5)](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/9FZQV42W?page=5)

<mark style="background: #5fb236">Finally, as a side effect of both of these previously identified mechanisms of exclusion, we can see a lack of cross-citation—ie. a lack of effectively building on each other’s work. The lack of cross-citation across disciplinary lines indicates that findings from one discipline are not respected as adequate evidence to inform researchers from another and that</mark> [(p. 5)](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/9FZQV42W?page=5)

<mark style="background: #5fb236">If we look at how CS is labeled according to Biglan’s classification, we can see that it operates as a &quot;hard&quot; and &quot;applied&quot; discipline. Kolb for their part sees CS as &quot;abstract&quot; and &quot;active&quot;. In stark contrast, HSS have almost a virginal quality being labeled in the exact opposite categories, as being irrevocably &quot;soft&quot; and &quot;pure&quot; (Biglan), &quot;concrete&quot; and &quot;reflective&quot; (Kolb).</mark> [(p. 6)](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/9FZQV42W?page=6)

<mark style="background: #5fb236">We hypothesize that behind these constructed distinctions of &quot;hard&quot; vs. &quot;soft&quot; or &quot;active&quot; vs. &quot;reflective&quot;, there are serious assumptions about the nature of academic problems, historically anchored to economic beliefs which shape who is worthy and who is not. It is the distinction between accuracy and inaccuracy, between tangibility and speculation, between clear and distinct on one end and confused and ambiguous on the other. The former state is understood to be much more real, and valuable, being framed as more economically relevant.</mark> [(p. 6)](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/9FZQV42W?page=6)

<mark style="background: #5fb236">Setting up false dichotomies reinforces a false belief in the existence of inherently opposing, rather than complementary, disciplinary norms and ultimately escalates in the observed reluctance of differing disciplines to mutually engage.</mark> [(p. 7)](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/9FZQV42W?page=7)

<mark style="background: #5fb236">In this framing of disciplines based solely on subject matter (ie. content and method), the natural sciences, engineering and computer science operate as &quot;hard&quot; or &quot;paradigmatic&quot; whereas the humanities are seen as &quot;idiosyncratic&quot;. These latter disciplines do not qualify as &quot;paradigmatic&quot; and are classified as irreversibly &quot;soft&quot;. The social sciences, such as sociology and business fields are thus framed as being in futile search of a paradigm. That is, they display a potentiality for finding a paradigm but have not been able to find one and therefore are categorized as relatively &quot;soft&quot; to the STEM disciplines.</mark> [(p. 7)](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/9FZQV42W?page=7)

<mark style="background: #5fb236">The second dimension of Biglan’s classification is defined by the relation between &quot;applied&quot; and &quot;pure&quot; aspects of disciplines. Accounting and engineering fields, including CS, are thus implicitly labeled as practical, whereas the natural sciences, social sciences and the humanities are categorized as abstract, implying less tangible utility 4. The label of &quot;active&quot; being applied to STEM disciplines also reinforces the false assumption that CS, as an &quot;active&quot; discipline, is meant to hold the agency in situations requiring intervention and possesses the greater influence on system and societal outcomes. The framing of CS as being opposite to the passive category of &quot;reflective&quot;, also devalues the importance of reflection in responsible CS development, while falsely framing reflection in opposition to effectiveness and efficiency.</mark> [(p. 7)](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/9FZQV42W?page=7)

<mark style="background: #5fb236">If we follow Habermas, HSS is framed around humanistic goals of emancipation, participaction, and respectful inclusion of all stakeholders present or absent, powerful or not. These are thus the priorities that the CS field will fundamentally neglect once they disengage with HSS.</mark> [(p. 8)](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/9FZQV42W?page=8)

<mark style="background: #5fb236">Given that CS technical artifacts have a global impact on our lives, accuracy understood as a techno-scientific requirement of clarity and distinctiveness is not enough. Applied blindly, irrespective of context and social power imbalances, accuracy as a practice, value and assumption is, in fact, a formula for stabilizing forms of dominance as it amplifies and reproduces historical and structural inequities. Instead, we need to focus on a critical engagement with exclusionary disciplinary classifications and their consequences in order to develop a new ethics of collaborative pedagogy at the intersection of CS and HSS.</mark> [(p. 8)](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/9FZQV42W?page=8)

<mark style="background: #5fb236">A transversal problem is distinct from an interdisciplinary problem as its solution is not found in-between given disciplines but should be constructed from the effects on the stakeholders that could be or were impacted by it, and from a critique of the types of formal and substantive assumptions, choices, requirements and methodologies that are currently built into AI ethics pedagogy.</mark> [(p. 9)](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/9FZQV42W?page=9)

<mark style="background: #ffd400">First, we recommend to focus on thinking and acting differently by including broad non-CS expertise and researchers when dealing with technical artifacts which have clear social impact.</mark> [(p. 9)](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/9FZQV42W?page=9)

<mark style="background: #ffd400">Second, we need to educate students on frameworks of intervention based around existing problems, not anchored to the existing skills of those assumed to be in the position to address the problems. Real world ethics problems call for a diverse set of skills.</mark> [(p. 9)](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/9FZQV42W?page=9)

<mark style="background: #ffd400">Third, we need to incorporate explicit references in the AI ethics syllabi of stakeholders beyond the technologist, including discussions of their roles and how they are impacted. One of the key issues that a syllabus should address is a more inclusive identification of stakeholders when formulating an AI problem.</mark> [(p. 9)](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/9FZQV42W?page=9)

<mark style="background: #ffd400">One of the questions that every AI syllabus should account for is not only who the target audience is but who the impacted parties may be. Beyond institutional stakeholders, such as product managers or engineers, there could be greater discussion of societal stakeholders, such as policymakers and regulators, as well as more speculative reflection on who perhaps could contribute to the solution, though may be rarely invited to do so.</mark> [(p. 9)](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/9FZQV42W?page=9)

<mark style="background: #ffd400">Fourth, we need to develop frameworks to work with affected populations and experiential experts, including community organizer toolkits and speakers.</mark> [(p. 9)](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/9FZQV42W?page=9)

<mark style="background: #ffd400">Fifth, we suggest engaging students in the exercise of assessing disciplinary competence in a range of situations and developing 52</mark> [(p. 9)](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/9FZQV42W?page=9)

<mark style="background: #ffd400">FAccT ’21, March 3–10, 2021, Virtual Event, Canada Inioluwa Deborah Raji, Morgan Klaus Scheuerman, and Razvan Amironesei the ability to identify the relevance of a particular approach to address challenges for specific types of problems or in particular situations.</mark> [(p. 10)](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/9FZQV42W?page=10)

<mark style="background: #ffd400">There should be an explicit conversation about not only what is gained from the methods embraced by one’s discipline, but also what is lost—and how the limitations of one’s disciplinary lens can be addressed by looking towards mixed method approaches, or knowledge and collaboration with other disciplines to fill in certain ability gaps.</mark> [(p. 10)](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/9FZQV42W?page=10)

```
@inproceedings{Raji_Scheuerman_Amironesei_2021, address={New York, NY, USA}, series={FAccT ’21}, title={You Can’t Sit With Us: Exclusionary Pedagogy in AI Ethics Education}, ISBN={978-1-4503-8309-7}, url={[https://doi.org/10.1145/3442188.3445914](https://doi.org/10.1145/3442188.3445914)}, DOI={[10.1145/3442188.3445914](https://doi.org/10.1145/3442188.3445914)}, abstractNote={Given a growing concern about the lack of ethical consideration in the Artificial Intelligence (AI) field, many have begun to question how dominant approaches to the disciplinary education of computer science (CS)---and its implications for AI---has led to the current “ethics crisis”. However, we claim that the current AI ethics education space relies on a form of “exclusionary pedagogy,” where ethics is distilled for computational approaches, but there is no deeper epistemological engagement with other ways of knowing that would benefit ethical thinking or an acknowledgement of the limitations of uni-vocal computational thinking. This results in indifference, devaluation, and a lack of mutual support between CS and humanistic social science (HSS), elevating the myth of technologists as “ethical unicorns” that can do it all, though their disciplinary tools are ultimately limited. Through an analysis of computer science education literature and a review of college-level course syllabi in AI ethics, we discuss the limitations of the epistemological assumptions and hierarchies of knowledge which dictate current attempts at including ethics education in CS training and explore evidence for the practical mechanisms through which this exclusion occurs. We then propose a shift towards a substantively collaborative, holistic, and ethically generative pedagogy in AI education.}, note={27 citations (Semantic Scholar/DOI) [2022-12-27]}, publisher={Association for Computing Machinery}, author={Raji, Inioluwa Deborah and Scheuerman, Morgan Klaus and Amironesei, Razvan}, year={2021}, month={Mar}, pages={515–525}, collection={FAccT ’21} }
```

%% Import Date: 2023-01-23T14:10:57.164-08:00 %%
