---
aliases:
  - Large Language Models Can Be Easily Distracted by Irrelevant Context
  - "Large Language Models Can Be Easily Distracted by Irrelevant Context"
authors: "Freda Shi, Xinyun Chen, Kanishka Misra, Nathan Scales, David Dohan, Ed Chi, Nathanael Schärli, Denny Zhou"
date: '2023-04-17 20:12:01'
linter-yaml-title-alias: Large Language Models Can Be Easily Distracted by Irrelevant Context
order: -1
tags: 
title: Large Language Models Can Be Easily Distracted by Irrelevant Context
url: "http://arxiv.org/abs/2302.00093"
---

# Large Language Models Can Be Easily Distracted by Irrelevant Context





## Abstract

Large language models have achieved impressive performance on various natural language processing tasks. However, so far they have been evaluated primarily on benchmarks where all information in the input context is relevant for solving the task. In this work, we investigate the distractibility of large language models, i.e., how the model problem-solving accuracy can be influenced by irrelevant context. In particular, we introduce Grade-School Math with Irrelevant Context (GSM-IC), an arithmetic reasoning dataset with irrelevant information in the problem description. We use this benchmark to measure the distractibility of cutting-edge prompting techniques for large language models, and find that the model performance is dramatically decreased when irrelevant information is included. We also identify several approaches for mitigating this deficiency, such as decoding with self-consistency and adding to the prompt an instruction that tells the language model to ignore the irrelevant information.



<mark style="background: #5fb236">Self-consistency (SC; Wang et al., 2022c; Shi et al., 2022a) may further boost the reasoning performance by marginalizing over intermediate reasoning steps that share the same final result. In practice, SC can be implemented by (1) sampling several solutions from the large language model and (2) taking the majority vote. Note that SC is orthogonal to above techniques, and can be combined with any of them.</mark> [(p. 4)](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/IV246Z3J?page=4) 





```

```

%% Import Date: 2023-04-17T20:12:25.182-07:00 %%
