---
aliases:
- GIL and Multithreading
- GIL
created: '2022-07-03'
date: '2022-07-03'
modified: '2022-07-03'
tags: []
title: GIL and Multithreading
updated: 2022-07-04 14:07
---

# GIL and Multithreading

Sources: [[4archives/Hypothesis/Python behind the scenes 13 the GIL and its effects on Python multithreading]]

GIL stands for Global Interpreter Lock. The purpose of having GIL is to make sure [CPython - Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/CPython) interpreter is thread-safe.

A python thread waits **5ms** by default (the switch interval) if the GIL is locked, and it will send a release request to the GIL-holding thread. **It's up to the OS to decide which thread to wake up if there are multiple waiting threads.**

## Advantages

GIL makes it:

1. safe to share objects (esp. mutable objects) , data (esp. global data), and modules between threads;
2. easy to write C extensions without any additional locks — removing GIL will break all current extensions;
3. easy to do reference counting — this is how Python do garbage collection which is not suited for multithreading;

## Convoy Effect

When an I/O bound thread performs an I/O operation, it releases the GIL. By the time it finishes that operation and tries to reclaim the GIL, it is very likely the GIL has been acquired by another thread, and therefore **it has to wait for at least 5ms**.

5ms may not seem like much time, but it is critical if the I/O operation itself is fast. So, such wait can significantly increase the overall computation time.

Solutions:

1. Changing the switch interval to smaller values;
2. Force the OS to choose I/O thread by constraining all threads on a single core;