---
aliases:
  - Information Seeking Strategies
  - Information Seeking Strategies
created: 2022-11-20
date: '2022-11-20'
modified: 2024-07-23
tags: []
title: "Information Seeking Strategies"
---

# Information Seeking Strategies

References:

- [[20221120131625|Situating Search]]

Information Seeking Strategies analyses the interactions users can have with a search engine from four aspects:

## Method

The method of interacting includes searching and scanning:

- **Searching** is similar to depth first search. We know what we are searching for.
- **Scanning** is similar to breadth first search, sense-making during the process. We don't yet know what we want[^1] [^2].

## Goal

The goal of interaction can be selecting or learning:

- **Selecting** is when the goal is to pick some items that meet your criterion.
- **Learning** is when the goal is to discover and learn diverse aspects of a subject. This is where model generated answers might not help because they hinder the discoverability of sources with richer context, especially when citations are also generated without any scientific rigorousness and truthfulness.

## Mode

- Specification is searching with filters.
- Recognition is searching with extra questions.

## Resource

We can either select based on the content (Information), or the metadata of such content (Metadata).

In total, there can be 16 different scenarios from such four aspects.

[^1]: [[Why We Should Not Trust Chatbots As Sources of Information]]
[^2]: [[‘Google says I’m a dead physicist’- is the world’s biggest search engine broken-|‘Google says I’m a dead physicist’: is the world’s biggest search engine broken?]]