---
aliases:
  - How to Write a Paper with Zettelkasten
  - "How to Write a Paper with Zettelkasten"
linter-yaml-title-alias: How to Write a Paper with Zettelkasten
order: -20220705214840
tags: [productivity/zettelkasten productivity productivity/note_taking]
title: How to Write a Paper with Zettelkasten
---

# How to Write a Paper with Zettelkasten

Highlights: [[How to Take Smart Notes]]

## Writing is Not the Goal

We generate notes while we spend time understanding the materials and coming up with ideas. Thus, writing should be an easy post-processing step of those artifacts of our thinking and reading.

Our growth should come from our thinking and learning, accompanied by the practice of writing and note-taking.

## 1. Fleeting Notes

This step captures **what we think**. It doesn't have to be in order or in full sentences. All fleeting notes should go into an inbox where they will be discarded as soon as we processed.

In special cases, if you have very mature ideas at this time, you can create [[#3 Permanent Notes]] instead.

## 2. Literature Notes

This includes what we read what might be useful right now or in the future, along with necessary bibliographic details.

## 3. Permanent Notes

Go through the notes you have from [[#1 Fleeting Notes]] and [[#2 Literature Notes]] and figure out:
1. an idea that is relevant to you, or [[202205011900 Capture Toolkit#What should we capture|resonates]] with you;
2. what does it relate to in the notes you already have, add links or create an index note if necessary;
3. what is missing from that idea and what are the questions you need to answer;
    1. This should motivate you to find more resources on the topic to enrich your idea or argument.

## 4. Project

- Bring forward all relevant notes around an idea as a project as in [[202204291344|PARA]]. See what is missing and redundant, and go out to source more information if needed.
- Draft your notes into something slightly more coherent and workable.
- Iterate on the draft until you have a manuscript.

## Note-taking is Not the Goal

We take notes not for just one single project we are working at the moment but also for all possible projects we will be working on in the future, or simply for our intellectual amusement. We learn most of our knowledge not by systematic education, but accidental encounters instead[^1][^2].

[^1]: [[How to Take Smart Notes#^ref-63723]]
[^2]: [[How to Take Smart Notes#^ref-58985]]