---
aliases:
- Being Human
created: '2023-02-05'
tags: []
title: Being Human
---

# Being Human

In the [[The Expanding Dark Forest and Generative AI|expanding Dark Forest]] of the Internet, generative AIs can easily create waves of profit-oriented content that conceals the truth and genuine desires for human connections. Thus, it is important to remain, reinforce, and boost signals of our humanity and to be on the lookout for that of other people[^1].

[[In the Age of A.I., Major in Being Human|In the Age of A.I., Major in Being Human]] outlines several core aspects that we should pay attention to when fostering our unique humanness:

1. Develop a unique voice through [[20221127140633|Reading and Writing]]. Some models can indeed copy a writing or drawing style, but they can never copy our minds, our personal experiences, and the unique perspectives that go into our writing. It is also true that such uniqueness shapes our situational awareness and decision-making process[^2].
2. Develop a strategic mindset that transcends a single task. Models can do some tasks reasonably well, but they never understand the life goals we would have when tackling problems. In the article, presentation skill is one example. When giving a speech on a certain topic, our goal isn't simply to talk through some slides. Instead, we communicate with the audience in a shared context. It requires much planning and engagement that no modern-day models can complete independently.
3. Develop empathy. Not everything has to be pragmatically computational. Humanities proliferate in domains beyond computer science, like literature, drama, biography, and history. But be careful, [[Human-like programs abuse our empathy - even Google engineers aren’t immune]].

It is also important to understand both the limitations of current AI systems and the meaning of human authorship and connection[^3] [^4] [^5], and resist succumbing to the pervasive popularisation of AI use[^6].

[^1]:[[OpenAI discontinues its AI writing detector due to “low rate of accuracy”|OpenAI discontinues its AI writing detector due to “low rate of accuracy”]]
[^2]: [[The Expanding Dark Forest and Generative AI|The Expanding Dark Forest and Generative AI]]
[^3]: [[20240209182438|Here’s the Thing AI Just Can’t Do | WIRED]]
[^4]: [[Google shattered human connection|Google shattered human connection]]
[^5]: [[20230720210314|Connection Engine]]
[^6]: [[20221127140633#^86409a|Importance of Reading and Writing]]