---
aliases:
- Situated Language-Using Framework
created: '2023-10-01'
tags: []
title: Situated Language-Using Framework
---

# Situated Language-Using Framework

Source: [[schlangen_2023|What A Situated Language-Using Agent Must be Able to Do: A Top-Down Analysis]]

What does it mean to be an agent with situated language-using capability?

It needs to have representations of the language, the world ([[20221120094433|Cognitive Model]]), the situation, the discourse, and itself and other agents in the interaction. It dynamically and incrementally learns and processes new information as the discourse progresses.

## Situation Model
1. Actual situation: the situation where the interaction happens.
2. Reported situation: the situation based on a description.
3. Social situation: the social context that could be manifested in the conversation.

## Discourse Model
Used to determine coherence.

## Agent Model
Embodied beliefs, desires, and intentions.

Having the abovementioned models is not enough. The constantly changing interplay of those models and utterances necessitates the ability to process and learn any given new information incrementally.

As outlined above, to meaningfully become an independent and free agent, the context the agent has to work with is quite intricate and sizable. Admittedly, we are good at tackling problems with a bottom-up angle, dissecting the large problem into workable pieces. However, given the current research directions and seemingly overlook of the fuller picture, we need to consider the complexity more seriously.