---
aliases:
- Bullshit
created: '2023-01-15'
date: '2023-01-15'
modified: '2023-01-15'
tags: []
title: Bullshit
---

# Bullshit

> For the essence of bullshit is not that it is false but that it isphony. In order to appreciate this distinction, one must recognize that a fake or a phony need not be in any respect (apart from authenticity itself) inferior to the real thing. What is not genuine need not also be defective in some other way. It may be, after all, an exact copy. What is wrong with a counterfeit is not what it is like, but how it was made. This points to a similar and fundamental aspect of the essential nature of bullshit: although it is produced without concern with the truth, it need not be false. The bullshitter is faking things. But this does not mean that he necessarily gets them wrong.
>
> -- <cite>On Bullshit by Harry Frankfurt</cite>

Bullshit isn't about a statement being true or false. Unlike a lie that often goes the opposite way of the truth, bullshit goes around regardless of the truth. What makes it dangerous is that you can learn something from negative examples (lies), but not from the complete chaos and noise.

What is even more dangerous is that, similar to lies, they can mislead people with seemingly correct information, as is the case with [[Transcript- Ezra Klein Interviews Gary Marcus|Transcript: Ezra Klein Interviews Gary Marcus]]. And when the bullshit is coincidentally false[^1], the company behind such misinformation faces no punishment whatsoever.

[^1]: [[ChatGPT sometimes makes up facts. For one law prof, it went too far.|ChatGPT sometimes makes up facts. For one law prof]]