---
aliases:
  - Setting Goals vs. Setting Process
created: 2023-09-24
date: '2023-09-24'
modified: 2024-09-05
tags: []
title: "Setting Goals vs. Setting Process"
---

# Setting Goals vs. Setting Process

A goal is binary. You either achieve it or not. However, associating all of your happiness, fulfilment, and self-worth only with a single event is detrimental to your mental health and growth[^1]. Additionally, finding goals can be challenging and differentiating exciting opportunities and true callings has not always been easy[^2].

You might feel focused or even productive when fixating on the goals, but just as [[20220724212820|Multitasking]], it is an illusion that can actually cloud our judgement and impair our performance due to pressure, performance anxiety, anticipation, and uncoordinated decision-making — your mind might know what you want, but your action is at lost.

Instead of targeting the goals, it is more useful to develop a concrete plan or strategy for those goals first, then focus on the process or steps instead. Trust the process, or " 尽人事听天命 " as the Chinese saying goes.

But how can we reconcile this with [[20230523162036|Manifesting Magic]]? Having goals seems to be a double-edged sword. On one hand, it promotes motivation and the idea that the whole universe is conspiring to help you. On the other hand, it deprives you of the attention and energy that could have been spent on the tasks at hand.

Maybe there is a spectrum for goal setting with a sweet spot where it *nudges you in the right direction but not too forcefully to derail your performance*. Maybe revisiting the goals and plans occasionally is one solution, while normally, it should sit on the back burner of your brain.

[^1]: [[32454089|When I Stopped Trying to Self-Optimize]]
[^2]: [[The Liberation of Letting Go- How to Give Up Your Dreams|The Liberation of Letting Go: How to Give Up Your Dreams]]