---
aliases:
  - Sampling
title: "Sampling"
created: 2024-07-01
updated: 2024-07-01
modified: 2024-07-01
---

# Sampling

Sampling process usually takes 5 steps:

1. Identifying the target population;
2. Select the sampling frame;
3. Choose the sampling method;
4. Determine the sampling size;
5. Collect the sample data;

**Sampling frame** refers to the data points you can sample from. Ideally it should be the entire target population, but in reality, it often refers to the data points you have access to. Sometimes the frame might even contain examples outside your target population due to various reasons such as noise.

## Probability Sampling Method

### Simple Random Sampling

Every data point has the same probability of being chosen. If the sample size is large, then the sample can be fairly representative. However, if the size is small, then some groups of data points could be underrepresented (skewed population).

### Stratified Random Sampling

To overcome the underrepresentation issue from simple random sampling, one can stratify the data into different strata where some data points from each stratum can be included. With that being said, it is difficult to identify the strata if you are not familiar with the population or if the population has multiple complex factors you can consider.

### Cluster Random Sampling

Use all members of a cluster instead of sampled data from a strata. It is useful when each cluster represents the population as a whole, but such assumption may be difficult to be held true in reality.

### Systematic Random Sampling

In systematic random sampling, one orders the population in a senquence and selects every certain interval from a random starting point. Every one has the same chance of being selected but to know the population size and order them randomly can be a challenge.

## Non-probability Sampling Method

Such sampling can be quick and cheap and useful for exploratory studies. However, it might incur bias.

1. Convenience sampling: sampling based on what is convenient to you; It can suffer from undercoverage bias where the sample is not representative of the population.
2. Voluntary response sampling: sampling based on who are willing to give a response. It suffers from nonresponse bias;
3. Snowball sampling: sampling by recruitment; Recruitment likely shares similar characteristics or background such that the sampling is not representative of the population.
4. Purpose sampling: targeted sampling for a specific group where the underlying large population is less relevant;