---
aliases:
  - AI and Writing
created: 2024-03-31
date: '2024-03-31'
modified: 2025-01-18
title: "AI and Writing"
---

# AI and Writing

Sources:
- [[20240313234559|AI and the End of Writing]]
- [[20240330205654|How to Resist the Temptation of AI When Writing | WIRED]]

People joked about how AI *can't* replace software engineers because then product managers would have to be very specific about their requirements (with their prompts, persumbly), at which point it's no longer different from programming in essence.

But the bigger issue here isn't about AI replacing us, it's usually someone up in the decision chain who usually have less stake in the actual programming that makes those decisions. We don't really have a say when our jobs are eliminated.

And I believe it’s the same for writing — it can’t take your job just because it can extrude some text. Someone somewhere decides that AI's generation is as good as yours for whatever reason, even when it's not.

The labor displacement is real, is present, and is inevitable. Some believe it's driven by good old fashioned capitalism or greedy, and others swore their allegiance to the coming technogod. For me, it is the results of years of consumption and quick dopamine hits of fast food, fashion, and entertainment. Our minds have been inundated by the influx of information and therefore deprived the astuteness in differentiating artistic nuances. We seek quick answers that are easy on the eye without any care about truthfulness. We seek writings that can fulfil a transaction swiftly without any respect for human interaction ([[They squandered the holy grail|They squandered the holy grail]]). We seek profitable replacement without any consideration of the environment or fellow content creators.

Reflecting on my personal online experience of the past decade, I know we could have done better. But I also have to admit, part of me know we will always end up with some kind of mess.

> Only if you know what you want and understand what you’re doing, can you use your tools appropriately to achieve the results you desire[^1].

Can we fight back? Can we take their weapons and use them against the trend? Can we rebuild ourselves so good that they can't dismiss the difference? For starters, I think, to delegate writing to automation systems, AI or not, it requires you to understand how it works and where it’s most applicable, like any other instruments we humans have wielded before. To better collaborate, we now have to **plan, think, and reason better** instead of letting those models cut all the corners. We should also prioritise higher standards, more human connections, and community forming[^2]. Because if we don't do that, then we aren't necessarily improving, we’re just lazier, cheaper and easily replaceable.

[^1]: [[20240313234559|AI and the End of Writing]]
[^2]: [[20240209182438|Here’s the Thing AI Just Can’t Do | WIRED]]