---
aliases:
  - How to Articulate
title: "How to Articulate"
created: 2024-08-05
updated: 2024-08-05
modified: 2024-08-05
---

# How to Articulate

Source: [How to Brilliantly Articulate Your Opinions - YouTube](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=iF6-LkEXWfc)

We favour recency and accessibility when we express ourselves, like a quotation megaphone. Deliciously worded sentences might be appealing and satisfactory to both the speaker and the audience, but it's quite the opposite in reality. The satisfaction is a **false quality** and when we say yes to the false ones, we are saying no to being authentic.

To better deliver our ideas, we need to have **options**. Not being aware of any options, we fall back to using words or general expressions that feel comfortable, but it also means we are loosing the opportunity to integrate our values and views in the utterance.

## Finding Values

Personal values are the northern stars of our expression. Choosing what values we want to convey paves the foundation of our communication and the direction of our thoughts. This is true for behavioural interviews, and can be used in real life as well. Some common values are honesty, simplicity, and experience.

**Honesty**: Not being truthful while speaking is multitasking and it can take you out of the flow and make you loose the track of communication.

## Acceptance

Accept the imperfection of our own speaking and be ready to speak.

## Practice

Clarity is derived only from output ([[20220709195323|Only Writing Counts]], [[20221127140633|Importance of Reading and Writing]]). No matter how much material we consume, if we don't practice writing or speaking, then we can't learn the lessons on how to articulate by heart([[20240803213840|Advice]]).

## Intellectual Humility

You don't need to have all the answers for everything.