---
aliases:
  - Hype Cycle
created: 2024-02-11
date: '2024-02-11'
modified: 2024-09-05
title: "Hype Cycle"
---

# Hype Cycle

Source: [[20240206075938|Gates' Law: How Progress Compounds and Why It Matters]]

A typical hype cycle that consists of five stages:
1. **Emergence**: a new technology is picked up the media. The public shows great interest in it, even though it still has no valid use case yet.
2. **Peak Hype**: Hype continues to build up with growing coverage and startups sprouting off to become the first movers. New research and development are also booming. Scammers might also step in to take some windfalls.
3. **Disillusionment**: Prominent failures or lack of substantial progress lead to disillusionment. The hype subsides, but the research might continue. [[20240318230841|Have We Reached Peak AI?]]
4. **Enlightenment**: The technology is constantly improved and better use cases are found[^1]. Mainstream adoption begins with laws and guardrails developed to curb scams.
5. **Plateau**: The technology becomes part of our daily lives. It stops to be novel and dominant players saturate the market with less and less disruptive features[^2].

This is not to say that hype is all bad. In the early stage of the cycle, it attracts interest, talents, and investments that enable us to move forward. Similarly, it also does not guarantee that all development can reach enlightenment or maturity in the end — we have seen _again and again_ that model releases reveal similar flaws with seemingly no solution in sight[^3].

[^1]: [[20231112144602|The Innovator’s Dilemma]]
[^2]: [[20240211141732|Adjacent Possiblities]]
[^3]: [[OopsGPT|OopsGPT]]