---
aliases:
  - Taking the High Road
title: "Taking the High Road"
created: 2024-07-20
updated: 2024-07-20
modified: 2024-09-10
---

# Taking the High Road

When thinking narrowly about the perceived threat, it's hard to resist the urge to become defensive or angry. The single-mindedness can cloud your judgement and make the interaction less ideal in a social setting. Here are things we can do to take the high road when it happens, to be true to one's values when the situation is tough:

- **Noting**: be aware of the situation, the trigger, and your own reaction and emotion. It distances you and your thoughts to create a safe gap to allow critical thinking to flow. *The core message of embracing one's emotion is that it might feel bad, but it doesn't mean the emotion itself is bad.*
- **De-identifying**: abstract yourself from the equation and understand the specific thing that is being criticised. The results might be terrible, but you are not.
- Additional practices of **breathing** and soothing imagery (Serenity Now!) can also calm yourself down.
- Similar to preparing for an interview, one can prepare for these triggering events by coming up with **a game plan** on how to respond with the following template:
	Imagine a better version of yourself that you want to be, and ask them how they would answer/approach these questions:
	1. What would you care about in this situation?
	2. What do you understand about the situation?
	3. What would you do in this situation? What tone of voice would you use? How would you communicate your opinions? One can follow the template "When ＿, I feel ＿, and I would like ＿."
	4. How can I help myself (the non-compassionate self)?
- Thank people for their criticism to build a positive mental relationship with criticism.
- Making positive life changes can also reinforce your support system and better prepare you in the time of crisis.

References:
- [[How to take things less personally|How to take things less personally]]
- [[How to take the high road|How to take the high road]]
- [[How to Stay Confident When You’re Being Criticized|How to Stay Confident When You’re Being Criticized]]