---
aliases:
  - Toxic Ambiguity
title: "Toxic Ambiguity"
created: 2024-07-21
updated: 2024-07-21
modified: 2024-07-21
---

# Toxic Ambiguity

Often times, the word ambiguity, along with other phrases like start-up environment and ownership, has been slowly evolving into a red flag for a toxic work environment[^1].

They use the word as if they are comfortable with ambiguous results or ambiguous revenue. They are not, not in the slightest way. Yet they want you to enjoy this constant state of ambiguity without holding themselves accountable and to produce unequivocal results without any of their help. To them, ambiguity is not tolerable when it comes to results and them being on the receiving end, and it is expected when it comes to the working state and us being on the giving end.

How to tell if the ambiguity is toxic:

1. Is there any **honest communication**? Are people actively taking measures to reduce ambiguity? A healthy collaborative relationship aims to share as much as possible to better help you navigate through the ambiguity instead of being distant or holding information;
2. Is there a clear process for engagement? If the team has suffered from ambiguity long enough, there should be a game plan to tackle it.

Complex problems will have ambiguity and details that one person can be blind to[^2]. The important part of the solution is never being comfortable with the ambiguity. It's actively reducing and navigating the ambiguity with transparent communication and collaboration and reaching clarity in the end.

[^1]: [[Toxic Ambiguity- How a common job requirement has set us up for failure|Toxic Ambiguity: How a common job requirement has set us up for failure]]
[^2]: [[Reality has a surprising amount of detail|Reality has a surprising amount of detail]]