---
created: 2010-09-20
order: -1
tags: [CODE, BASB, Distill, note taking, productivity]
title: 202205011902 Distill
updated: 2022-05-03
---

## Note as First-class Citizen

When distilling notes, one could have many perspectives:
1. **Tag first**: it shows connections but carries **no structure** and therefore no progress (to track);
2. **Folder first**: it enforces structure and hierarchical organization but not connections;
3. **Note first**: you can still have tags in the note and notes in a folder but the mindset here is that you put more work on the note itself. For example, making connections between notes by directly linking them and refactoring them into atomic notes or [[202205011903 Express#Intermediate Packets|Intermediate Packets]] so that you can reuse them in the future.

By taking *Note First* mindset, you choose to enjoy your notes.

## Goal of Distillation

Making your notes more:
1. meaningful
2. concrete
3. valuable

## How to Distill

Understand the layers of information [[202205011904 Progressive Summarization|Progressive Summarization]]:
1. Raw source information
2. Captured notes
3. Refined notes (Bolded, Highlighted, Dissected, Grouped or Summarized)

Going through this workflow or layer of transformations, aka refining, you are essentially engaging with your notes.

## Not to Do When Distilling

### You Can't Save Everything and You Don't Need to

Compressing or distilling your notes makes everything else more efficient – easier to remember(useful) and retrieve(accessible). Your notes should not be an ever expanding archive of information.

### You Can't Analysis Everything

Following the Resonance Rule of [[202205011900 Capture Toolkit#^025849|Capturing]], we also need such guidance in distillation.

We don't necessarily have the mental energy to analyze all the captured notes, not to mention distilling all of them by scrutiny.

