---
created: 2010-11-06
order: -1
tags: [BASB, CODE, PKM]
title: 202205011859 Capture
updated: 2022-05-03
---

## What Does Capturing Mean?

1. Safeguard what information flows into the queue [[202205011859 Capture#What is your filter]];
2. Remove content that is no longer interesting: if you skip it three times, remove it;
3. Oldest first or shortest first;
4. Keep it separated from the second brain and only save the part that interests you in the second brain;

## Reactivity Loop

By Capturing and not consuming right away, it shortens the reactivity loop such that we can stay in the workflow.

## Information Diet

Information is food and you are what you eat. You can remind yourself by asking "am I consuming junk food?" every time you are thinking about capturing something.

### Possible Sources

1. Websites
2. Books
6. Videos
8. Podcasts
9. Papers
10. Newsletters

## Issues with Capture

From one perspective regarding the output:
1. Over-capturing: too much information is collected
2. Under-capturing: too little information is captured

From another perspective regarding the workflow:
1. Technical issues: tools etc.
2. Reality: life change etc.
3. Mental blocks

So we need some control mechanism to guard the capturing gate – asking what is the goal of collecting this information? ^526348

This turns the capture process into a curation workflow, aka. capturing with an intention or a filter.

## What is Your Filter?

Filter, or meaning, same thing here. It helps solicit the motivation and understanding of why we are looking for information in the first place. You can derive your filter based on [[202205011858 12 Favorite Problems]].

Essentially, note-taking is very **personal**, and deeply tied to individual's awareness of oneself.

## A Workflow for Yourself

A project that we can use as a motivation, a drive and a filter to navigate our capture, such as creating a newsletter or journaling.

## [[202205011900 Capture Toolkit]]