---
aliases:
  - PARA
  - "PARA"
created: 2012-12-30
linter-yaml-title-alias: PARA
order: -202204291344
tags: [BASB, PARA, CODE]
title: PARA
updated: 2022-05-07
---

# PARA

**PARA** stands for Project, Area, Resource, and Archive.

The goal of PARA method is to organize your notes based on where it flows into.

## Aera

- **Role** oriented: what is your responsibility assuming this role?
	- You have a standard to maintain even without some expected end goals;
- Work areas;
- Personal areas;

## Project

Based on your areas, you can have some ongoing projects that are:

- **Outcome** oriented: *something* is happening or will happen at some point in time;
	- **Measurable**: What is your objective?
	- **Trackable**: How can you track the progress?
	- **Completable**: Can you cross this off from your list?
	- **Actionable**: What are the **tasks** needed?
		- You cannot **do** a project but only actions/tasks.
- They are not a project if:
	- No deadline in sight
	- No outcome defined
	- No metric specified
	- No timeline scheduled

Q: Why do we go from areas to projects?

A: Figure out the projects based on your areas so that you have clear relation between your short-term efforts and your long-term goals.

Having a project mindset is like treating yourself as a *one man vendor*. Not only you have the tasks to finish, but also the resources and big picture that you need to consider.

### When a Project is Done

Key actions at key moments:
- **idea gathering** when the project starts;
- **recycle the knowledge** when the project ends;

Reflections upon completion:
1. Clean up tasks and goals
2. Savage useful notes into proper folders
3. Archive the rest of the project notes

### Project VS Hobby VS Dream

Hobbies do not contribute to your areas (unimportant)
Dreams do not have on-going projects (unachievable)

## Resource

Information that contributes to [[#Project]] or [[#Area]]

- Miscellaneous: interests or **useful** references;
- If something that is **not a project** and **does not fall into one of your areas**, then it should be a resource;

## Archive

- Inactive, obsolete projects, areas, or resources

## Information Flow Based on *Actionability*

|           | Time      | Actionability   |
| --------- | --------- | --------------- |
| Project   | < weeks   | most actionable |
| Area      | long-term | actionable      |
| Resources | NA        | back-log        |
| Archive   | NA        | read-only       |