---
aliases:
  - What Do We Mean When We Talk About “AI Democratisation”?
url: https://www.governance.ai/post/what-do-we-mean-when-we-talk-about-ai-democratisation
publisher: www.governance.ai
tags: []
---

## Highlights
<mark>When people speak about democratising some technology, they typically refer to democratising its use—that is, making it easier for a wide range of people to use the technology. For example the “democratisation of 3D printers” refers to how, over the last decade, 3D printers have become much more easily acquired, built, and operated by the general public.</mark>

<mark>Overall, efforts to democratise AI use involve reducing the costs of acquiring and running AI tools and providing intuitive interfaces to facilitate human-AI interaction without the need for extensive training or technical knowhow.</mark>

<mark>Excitement seems to primarily be about democratising AI development—that is, helping a wider range of people contribute to AI design and development processes.</mark>

<mark>A third sense of “AI democratisation” refers to democratising AI benefits—which is about facilitating the broad and equitable distribution of benefits that accrue to communities that build, control, and adopt advanced AI capabilities.2 Discussion tends to focus on the redistribution profits generated by AI products.</mark>

<mark>Finally, some discussions about AI democratisation refer to democratising AI governance. AI governance decisions often involve balancing AI-related risks and benefits to determine if, how, and by whom AI should be used, developed, and shared. The democratisation of AI governance is about distributing influence over these decisions to a wider community of stakeholders.</mark>

<mark>For the first three forms of democratisation discussed in this piece, “democratisation” is almost always used synonymously with “improving accessibility”. The democratisation of AI use is about making AI systems accessible for everyone to use. The democratisation of AI development is about making opportunities to participate in AI development widely accessible. The democratisation of AI benefits is mostly about distributing access to the wealth accrued through AI development, use, and control.</mark>

<mark>However, importantly, the democratisation of AI governance involves the introduction of democratic processes.</mark>

<mark>The democratisation of AI governance needs to involve careful consideration about how diverse stakeholder interests and values can be effectively elicited and incorporated into well-reasoned AI governance decisions.</mark>

