---
url: https://psyche.co/guides/how-to-use-compassion-focused-techniques-to-take-the-high-road
author: Alissa Hebbeln
publisher: Psyche
title: "How to take the high road"
tags: []
created: 2024-07-20
modified: 2024-07-21
---

## Highlights

> In CFT, this is reflected in what’s called the threat system, which involves neurological structures and functions that evolved to help anticipate, identify and rapidly respond to threats. When this system is engaged, a person will tend to feel emotions like fear, anxiety, anger or disgust. Thinking and attention narrow to focus on the perceived threat. That means you might become less able to engage in critical thinking or empathy as your thinking falls into rigid, self-protective patterns. Anger involves a sense of urgency to act, which can overwhelm good judgment when it takes you by surprise. This single-minded focus and urgency would have been helpful in preparing our ancestors to fight off predators in the wild, but can be a poor fit with the nuanced social stressors we regularly encounter today.

> Rather than beating yourself up for times you’ve handled things less than ideally, you can get curious – noticing and contemplating the situations, people, conversation topics and experiences that tend to activate your threat system. This curiosity can be particularly helpful in working with anger, as a core part of that work typically involves becoming aware of potentially tricky situations before they happen.

> You can even make a list of situations that commonly trigger a sense of threat in you, and then start to get curious about how you want to handle such situations going forward, in a way that fits with the sort of person you want to be. You will ultimately come up with a game plan for how you want to respond to these situations, and the skills that follow can help with this.

> Now consider how you would respond to this situation if you were at your best – your calmest, kindest, wisest, most confident and most compassionate. Reflect on the following questions and take a moment to write down some answers: 1. What would your compassionate self care about in this situation? (From this compassionate perspective, how do you want the situation to turn out? What is most important to you?) 2. What would your compassionate self understand about the situation? (What might your compassionate self remind your threatened self to consider?) 3. What might your compassionate self do in this situation? How might you approach the other person in a way that wouldn’t escalate the situation? What tone of voice would you want to use? How might you communicate your perspective assertively? (One of our favourite prompts is plastered on many classroom walls: ‘When ____________, I feel _________________, and I would like ________________.’) 4. How might your compassionate self help you stay grounded even if the other person persists or responds in an unhelpful way? What could you do that would be true to your values?

> Key points – How to take the high road 1. When someone acts badly, it’s tempting to react in kind. In moments when you feel attacked or judged, it can be difficult to ‘take the high road’ – to respond in a way that reflects your values and the sort of person you want to be. 2. Responding well can require managing a sense of threat. Confrontation with others can trigger an involuntary response that discourages empathy and critical thinking. Restoring a sense of safeness can make it easier to take the high road in these situations. 3. Get curious about possible triggers. Think about – and list, if you’d like – some of the situations, people or conversation topics that tend to activate your threat system. 4. Cultivate awareness of your feelings. ‘Checking in’ on your physical and mental state a few times a day, and other mindfulness practices, can make you better prepared to notice the changes that happen when you are triggered by an interaction. 5. Practise getting the safeness system online. With exercises such as soothing rhythm breathing and soothing mental imagery, you can learn to calm yourself when an encounter stirs up irritation or anxiety. 6. Enlist the help of your ‘compassionate self’. Imagine how a version of you that is especially kind, courageous and wise would respond to a specific challenging interaction – and use your reflections to create a plan. 7. Consider life changes to help your compassionate self emerge. Taking care of yourself through rest, exercise, support-seeking and so on can make it easier to respond well in potentially aggravating situations. 8. Exercise kind curiosity about other people’s behaviour. Ask yourself: ‘How does it make sense that someone might act that way?’ Considering possible explanations could help you respond with greater empathy.

