---
title: "(Life) Advice From the Creator of C++"
url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-QxI-RP6-HM
author: Honeypot
date: 2023-12-10
time: 11:22 AM
source: "reader"
aliases:
  - (Life) Advice From the Creator of C++
---
## Highlights
> Don't over specialize, don't be too sure that  you know the future. Be flexible and remember   that careers and jobs are a long-term thing.  Too many young people think they can optimize   something and then they find they've spent a  couple of years or more specializing in something  
> that may not have been the right thing and in the  process they burn out because they haven't spent   enough time building up friendships and having a  life outside computing. I meet a lot of sort of   "junior geeks" that just think that the only  thing that matters is the specialty of computing   programming or AI or graphics or something  like that and well it isn't and the rug might  
> be pulled under them but for that. And if they do  nothing else, well if you don't communicate your   ideas you can just as well do Sudoku. You have to  communicate and a lot of sort of caricature nerds   forget that. They think that if they can just  write the best code they can change the world ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01h8xm2gf0mvwrqbvhrqg9z60s))

> but you have to be able to listen, you have to  be able to communicate with your would-be users,   and learn from them, and you have to be  able to communicate your ideas to them.   So you can't just do code you have to do   something about culture and how to express ideas  and I mean I never regretted the time I spent   on history and on math. Math sharpens your mind,  history gives you some idea of your limitations,  
> on what's going on in the world, and so don't be  too sure. Take time to have a balanced life and   be ready for the opportunity. ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01h8xm30k5tvx8ts5tdrqn4xax))

