---
title: "32454213"
url: https://garymarcus.substack.com/p/elegant-and-powerful-new-result-that
author: Gary Marcus
date: 2023-12-10
time: 11:22 AM
source: "reader"
aliases:
  - Elegant and Powerful New Result That Seriously Undermines Large Language Models
---
## Highlights
> In neural network discussion, people are often impressed by successes, and pay far too little regard to what failures are trying to tell them. This symmetry fail is mighty big, a mighty persistent error that has endured for decades. It’s such a clear, sharp failure in reasoning it tempts me to simply stop thinking and writing about large language models altogether. If, after training on virtually the entire internet, you know Tom is Mary Lee‘s son, but can’t figure out without special prompting that Mary Lee therefore is Tom’s mother, you have no business running all the world’s software. ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01hb10hdrv6df2gkg27n76tbrh))---
title: "Elegant and Powerful New Result That Seriously Undermines Large Language Models"
url: https://garymarcus.substack.com/p/elegant-and-powerful-new-result-that
author: Gary Marcus
date: 2024-02-09
time: 12:01 AM
source: "reader"
aliases:
  - "Elegant and Powerful New Result That Seriously Undermines Large Language Models"
---
# Elegant and Powerful New Result That Seriously Undermines Large Language Models

## Highlights
> In neural network discussion, people are often impressed by successes, and pay far too little regard to what failures are trying to tell them. This symmetry fail is mighty big, a mighty persistent error that has endured for decades. It’s such a clear, sharp failure in reasoning it tempts me to simply stop thinking and writing about large language models altogether. If, after training on virtually the entire internet, you know Tom is Mary Lee‘s son, but can’t figure out without special prompting that Mary Lee therefore is Tom’s mother, you have no business running all the world’s software. ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01hb10hdrv6df2gkg27n76tbrh))

