---
title: "Same as Ever"
url:
author: Morgan Housel
date: 2023-12-10
time: 11:22 AM
source: "koreader"
aliases:
  - Same as Ever
---
## Highlights
> That’s the real definition of risk—what’s left over after you’ve prepared for the risks you can imagine.
> Risk is what you don’t see.

> One, think of risk the way the State of California thinks of earthquakes. It knows a major earthquake will happen. But it has no idea when, where, or of what magnitude. Emergency crews are prepared despite no specific forecast. Buildings are designed to withstand earthquakes that may not occur for a century or more. Nassim Taleb says, “Invest in preparedness, not in prediction.” That gets to the heart of it.

> John D. Rockefeller never had penicillin, sunscreen, or Advil. But you can’t say a low-income American with Advil and sunscreen today should feel better off than Rockefeller, because that’s not how people’s heads work. People gauge their well-being relative to those around them, and luxuries become necessities in a remarkably short period of time when the people around you become better off.

> There is no such thing as objective wealth—everything is relative, and mostly relative to those around you. It’s the path of least resistance to determining what life owes you and what you should expect. Everyone does it. Subconsciously or not, everyone looks around and says, “What do other people like me have? What do they do? Because that’s what I should have and do as well.”

> Psychologist Jonathan Haidt says people don’t really communicate on social media so much as they perform for one another.

> Today’s economy is good at generating three things: wealth, the ability to show off wealth, and great envy for other people’s wealth.

> Peter Kaufman, CEO of Glenair and one of the smartest people you will ever come across, once wrote:
> We tend to take every precaution to safeguard our material possessions because we know what they cost. But at the same time we neglect things which are much more precious because they don’t come with price tags attached: The real value of things like our eyesight or relationships or freedom can be hidden to us, because money is not changing hands.

> Same with expectations—they’re easy to ignore because their value isn’t on a price tag.

> The key thing is that unique minds have to be accepted as a full package, because the things they do well and that we admire cannot be separated from the things we wouldn’t want for ourselves or we look down upon.

> Part of the reason it happens is because the same personality traits that push people to the top also increase the odds of pushing them over the edge.

> Probability is about nuance and gradation. But in the real world people pay attention to black-and-white results.

> The core here is that people think they want an accurate view of the future, but what they really crave is certainty.

> • Bad news gets more attention than good news because pessimism is seductive and feels more urgent than optimism.
> • The odds of a bad news story—a fraud, a corruption, a disaster—occurring in your local town at any given moment is low. When you expand your attention nationally, the odds increase. When they expand globally, the odds of something terrible happening in any given moment are 100 percent.

> Professor Philip Tetlock has spent most of his career studying experts, self-proclaimed or otherwise. A big takeaway from his research is how awful so many experts are at predicting politics and the economy. Given that track record, will people ever choose to ignore the experts? “No way,” Tetlock once said. “We need to believe we live in a predictable, controllable world, so we turn to authoritative-sounding people who promise to satisfy that need.”

> If you have the right answer, you may or may not get ahead.
> If you have the wrong answer but you’re a good storyteller, you’ll probably get ahead (for a while).
> If you have the right answer and you’re a good storyteller, you’ll almost certainly get ahead.

^0d9a61

> In a perfect world, the importance of information wouldn’t rely on its author’s eloquence. But we live in a world where people are bored, impatient, emotional, and need complicated things distilled into easy-to-grasp scenes.

> Some things are immeasurably important. They’re either impossible, or too elusive, to quantify. But they can make all the difference in the world, often because their lack of quantification causes people to discount their relevance or even deny their existence.

> Did a lack of pandemics over the last fifty years make the world more vulnerable to COVID-19? Did the decline of infectious disease death make us underestimate the odds that it could happen in modern times?

> The irony of good times is that they breed complacency and skepticism of warnings.

> Fast growth leads to soft, airy wood that never had time to densify. And soft, airy wood is a breeding ground for fungus and disease. “A tree that grows quickly rots quickly and therefore never has a chance to grow old,” forester Peter Wohlleben wrote. Haste makes waste.

> You cannot compare the incentives of Silicon Valley coders trying to get you to click on ads to Manhattan Project physicists trying to end a war that threatened the country’s existence. You can’t even compare their capabilities.