---
title: "Why books don’t work"
url: https://andymatuschak.org/books/
author: Andy Matuschak
date: 2023-12-10
time: 11:22 AM
source: "reader"
aliases:
  - Why books don’t work
---
## Highlights
> I’ll realize *I had never really understood* the idea in question, though I’d certainly thought I understood when I read the book. Indeed, I’ll realize that *I had barely noticed how little I’d absorbed* until that very moment. ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01hh09feqgfqs49j5hyz5aptby))

> In summary: lectures don’t work because the medium lacks a functioning cognitive model. It’s (implicitly) built on a faulty idea about how people learn—transmissionism—which we can caricaturize as “lecturer says words describing an idea; students hear words; then they understand.” When lectures *do* work, it’s generally as part of a broader learning context (e.g. projects, problem sets) with a better cognitive model. But the lectures aren’t pulling their weight. If we really wanted to adopt the better model, we’d ditch the lectures, and indeed, that’s what’s been happening in US K–12 education. ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01hh0a0et8kqgfd3kde5j6zee0))

> Instead, I propose: we don’t necessarily have to make books work. *We can make new forms instead.* This doesn’t have to mean abandoning narrative prose; it doesn’t even necessarily mean abandoning paper—rather, we can free our thinking by abandoning our preconceptions of what a book is. Maybe once we’ve done all this, we’ll have arrived at something which does indeed look much like a book. We’ll have found a gentle path around the back of that intimidating slope. Or maybe we’ll end up in different terrain altogether. ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01hh0an10h7gnhef67fh3kbzf8))---
title: "Why books don’t work"
url: https://andymatuschak.org/books/
author: Andy Matuschak
date: 2024-02-03
time: 8:12 PM
source: "reader"
aliases:
  - "Why books don’t work"
---
# Why books don’t work

## Highlights
> I’ll realize *I had never really understood* the idea in question, though I’d certainly thought I understood when I read the book. Indeed, I’ll realize that *I had barely noticed how little I’d absorbed* until that very moment. ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01hh09feqgfqs49j5hyz5aptby))

> In summary: lectures don’t work because the medium lacks a functioning cognitive model. It’s (implicitly) built on a faulty idea about how people learn—transmissionism—which we can caricaturize as “lecturer says words describing an idea; students hear words; then they understand.” When lectures *do* work, it’s generally as part of a broader learning context (e.g. projects, problem sets) with a better cognitive model. But the lectures aren’t pulling their weight. If we really wanted to adopt the better model, we’d ditch the lectures, and indeed, that’s what’s been happening in US K–12 education. ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01hh0a0et8kqgfd3kde5j6zee0))

> Instead, I propose: we don’t necessarily have to make books work. *We can make new forms instead.* This doesn’t have to mean abandoning narrative prose; it doesn’t even necessarily mean abandoning paper—rather, we can free our thinking by abandoning our preconceptions of what a book is. Maybe once we’ve done all this, we’ll have arrived at something which does indeed look much like a book. We’ll have found a gentle path around the back of that intimidating slope. Or maybe we’ll end up in different terrain altogether. ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01hh0an10h7gnhef67fh3kbzf8))

