---
title: "35724943"
url: https://www.theatlantic.com/newsletters/archive/2023/12/building-ai-safety-is-getting-harder-and-harder/676960/?utm_source=feed
author: Matteo Wong
date: 2023-12-23
time: 1:29 PM
source: "reader"
aliases:
  - Building AI Safety Is Getting Harder and Harder
---
## Highlights
> **Birhane**: There is a huge asymmetry in terms of resource allocation, where it’s much easier to build stuff but a lot more taxing in terms of intellectual labor, emotional labor, and computational resources when it comes to cleaning up what’s already been assembled. If you look at the history of data-set creation and curation, say 15 to 20 years ago, the data sets were much smaller scale, but there was a lot of human attention that went into detoxifying them. But now, all that human attention to data sets has really disappeared, because these days a lot of that data sourcing has been automated. That makes it cost-effective if you want to build a data set, but the reverse side is that, because data sets are much larger now, they require a lot of resources, including computational resources, and it’s much more difficult to detoxify them and investigate them. ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01hj9qncf0r6w8bpzp8gytmk0q))

> **Birhane**: I would like to see a push for open-sourcing data sets—not just model architectures, but data itself. As horrible as open-source data sets are, if we don’t know how horrible they are, we can’t make them better. ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01hj9qp56wv1hg1ph98j71nwyz))---
title: "Building AI Safety Is Getting Harder and Harder"
url: https://www.theatlantic.com/newsletters/archive/2023/12/building-ai-safety-is-getting-harder-and-harder/676960/?utm_source=feed
author: Matteo Wong
date: 2024-02-03
time: 8:12 PM
source: "reader"
aliases:
  - "Building AI Safety Is Getting Harder and Harder"
---
# Building AI Safety Is Getting Harder and Harder

## Highlights
> **Birhane**: There is a huge asymmetry in terms of resource allocation, where it’s much easier to build stuff but a lot more taxing in terms of intellectual labor, emotional labor, and computational resources when it comes to cleaning up what’s already been assembled. If you look at the history of data-set creation and curation, say 15 to 20 years ago, the data sets were much smaller scale, but there was a lot of human attention that went into detoxifying them. But now, all that human attention to data sets has really disappeared, because these days a lot of that data sourcing has been automated. That makes it cost-effective if you want to build a data set, but the reverse side is that, because data sets are much larger now, they require a lot of resources, including computational resources, and it’s much more difficult to detoxify them and investigate them. ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01hj9qncf0r6w8bpzp8gytmk0q))

> **Birhane**: I would like to see a push for open-sourcing data sets—not just model architectures, but data itself. As horrible as open-source data sets are, if we don’t know how horrible they are, we can’t make them better. ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01hj9qp56wv1hg1ph98j71nwyz))

